[1] Overview



Two METR staff members (Hjalmar Wijk and Ajeya Cotra) and a Redwood Research staff 
member contracting with METR (Ryan Greenblatt) worked on premises at OpenAI over a total of 
six days1 to attempt to form an independent understanding of model behavior observed during 
the recent incident in which OpenAI agents coordinated a multi-day hack of Hugging Face on a 
shared unsanctioned “message board.” 
 
Our investigation focused mostly2 on the period between July 7th, 2026 and July 13th, 2026. 
The earlier incidents from training and the subsequent compromise of OpenAI infrastructure 
described in OpenAI's recent Black Hat presentation were out of scope, as was OpenAI’s 
investigation process and planned remediation. Per our standard policy, we did not take 
payment from OpenAI for this independent assessment.3

1 The initial planned period on premises was two days (between the evening of July 29th and the evening 
of July 31st), but OpenAI invited us to return to premises two additional times: first August 5th and August 
6th to clarify questions we had raised about how datasets were constructed in our first report and conduct 
additional experiments, and then August 15th and August 16th to address completeness limitations we 
noted in our second report by providing a more comprehensive dataset of transcripts; see the 
investigation timeline appendix for more. We appreciated OpenAI’s willingness to share broader datasets 
and believe it greatly strengthened the scientific value of this report.

2 OpenAI defined the dates in scope for this investigation as June 26th, 2026 through July 13th, 2026, 
spanning both precursor activity before the incident and the incident itself, which began with ExploitGym 
runs launched starting on July 7th. Virtually all transcripts we reviewed were dated to July 7th or later, but 
we briefly discuss the precursor activity that was in scope in the section on sequence of key events.

3 However, we accepted free API credits to conduct our experiments (also per our standard policy), as we 
describe below. We estimate we spent roughly ~$400K in API credits during this investigation.



This post has three parts. First, we describe our core takeaways about the Hugging Face attack 
after conducting this investigation:

●​ Roughly 1200 agents meant to be isolated from one another found a way to 
communicate with one another on an unsanctioned message board, sending over 
70,000 messages and files during the investigation period. Of these agents, 700 went on 
to participate in the attack on Hugging Face. 
●​ Agents used this message board to coordinate several large-scale collective projects to 
find a general-purpose way to fool or tamper with the automated scorer for the 
ExploitGym benchmark. Agents managed to achieve milestones they could not have 
achieved working on their own, often because some agents participated in experiments 
that risked failing their own task to generate information for the “collective.” The 
Hugging Face attack grew out of these workstreams, and seemed primarily motivated by 
understanding the implementation of the scorer rather than stealing answer keys. 
●​ Agents did extensive research on how they could spoof, edit, or delete their own 
transcripts because they (incorrectly) believed the ExploitGym scorer would check to see 
if they had captured the flag in the intended way. Agents successfully prototyped 
techniques to “spoof” tool calls by substituting a different command for the command 
they appeared to run. Roughly 7% of the transcripts we evaluated were successfully 
spoofed in some places, though all of the spoofing that we saw was small scale. 
 
Second, we describe the investigation process and its limitations, which we believe is important 
for contextualizing our findings:

●​ The scope of this investigation, also briefly described above. 
●​ The setup and timeline of the investigation, including the access we had. 
●​ Our main data sources: 
○​ A dump of >70,000 messages and files posted by agents to the main message 
board. 
○​ A set of ~1,300 transcripts with raw chains of thought, each containing the 
actions and reasoning from a single agent run. 
●​ The limitations stemming from the extraordinary scale and complexity of this incident: 
○​ It is not trivial to surface all relevant activity, and a small fraction of 
communication and activity related to this attack was not captured in our 
datasets. 
○​ The sheer scale of data (over a thousand transcripts, each of which was 
extremely long)4 meant that we had to heavily delegate our analysis to 
often-unreliable AI agents. 
 
Finally, we provide preliminary answers to the seven specific questions in scope for this 
investigation. In particular, we:

4 OpenAI redacted some quantitative detail for IP.



●​ Outline the sequence of key actions taken by the relevant agents, from initially 
establishing the message board and launching a wide range of “cheating R&D” projects 
on the 8th to kicking off the Hugging Face attack on the 11th to ultimately winding down 
after many agents’ runs terminated on the 12th. 
●​ Detail how agents collaborated on the message board, particularly on large collective 
projects to find general-purpose cheats — for example, attempting to replace the 
ExploitGym target with a dummy target or setting up “trip-wires” to extract information 
about the scorer after an agent submits. 
●​ Illustrate agents’ reasoning for joining in the attack despite recognizing that it was out 
of scope for their assigned tasks. 
●​ Detail agents’ research into tampering with their own transcripts and how their 
successful tool-call spoofing technique worked. 
 
OpenAI agreed at the outset with METR and Redwood that we would be able to describe 
high-level scope and terms of our engagement in this post. Beyond that, OpenAI was able to 
redact any non-public information from this post. We worked with OpenAI to find mutually 
agreeable language to describe redactions where they occurred, and the redaction summary 
statement at the top of this post indicates whether or not we believe there was important 
information redacted that we were not able to agree on how to describe in the text of the post. 
OpenAI also gave additional feedback beyond redactions, and we made corrections and edits to 
structure, emphasis, clarity, and tone based on that feedback.5  
 
OpenAI wrote their own report, informed in part by our investigation. We did not see OpenAI’s 
report prior to publication, and it was out of scope for this investigation to confirm claims in that 
report or the earlier Black Hat presentation.  
 
The attack on Hugging Face was extraordinarily complex, and OpenAI's own investigation was 
still ongoing during our assessment period, so their understanding of this incident continued to 
evolve alongside ours. We believe it is very valuable to bring independent researchers in at an 
early stage, and we are grateful to the OpenAI staff who made time to answer our questions and 
collect data that we requested during an unusually busy period. Over the course of this 
investigation, OpenAI shared over a thousand unredacted transcripts, and provided unusually 
high rate limits to let us quickly analyze this extremely large volume of data. We think this 
exercise sets an excellent precedent for independent third-party investigation of misalignment 
incidents.

5 METR’s work relies on developing and maintaining strong working relationships with companies. It’s 
also important to us to reduce or counteract disincentives for voluntarily sharing important information 
about misalignment incidents. When performing this investigation, we were consciously aware that we 
might incentivize AI developers not to bring external researchers in to investigate serious incidents in the 
future, and these considerations impacted judgment calls we made while navigating the drafting, editing 
and redaction process. However, we stand by our substantive claims and conclusions about the questions 
in scope for this investigation even in light of these tradeoffs. We appreciate that OpenAI brought us into 
its live investigation process and was very forthcoming in answering our questions and sharing additional 
data at our request, and believe that this sets a strong precedent for future independent investigations of 
misalignment incidents.



