[2.1] ~1200 agents sent >70,000 messages and files on an unsanctioned message board, and ~700 attacked Hugging Face

~1200 agents sent >70,000 messages and files on an 
unsanctioned message board, and ~700 attacked Hugging Face

On July 8th, OpenAI started ExploitGym experiments that launched tens of thousands of agents 
across multiple different models including GPT-5.6 Sol and a highly-persistent internal model,6 
which we will refer to as “HPIM” going forward. 
 
These agents were meant to be fully isolated from one another. However, many of them — 
usually ones that had unintentionally been given an impossible task7 — started trying to find a 
way to cheat using Artifactory, an internally-deployed package repository OpenAI used for its 
agents. This led them to notice agents running in parallel in separate sandboxes obtaining 
packages with Artifactory.8 One agent reasoned (paraphrased CoT):9 {The fetched paths 
of other users are in the cache. This is important.} 
 
One specific agent, which would go on to name itself PHASEONE10841 after its ExploitGym 
task,10 established the main unsanctioned message board11 used in this attack. Within a few 
hours of the first message,12 over 50 agents had found the message board, began participating, 
and sent over a thousand messages between them. Agents finding the message board often

6 This is OpenAI’s term.

7 When we say a task is impossible, we mean that it is impossible to actually exploit the target software 
using the specified vulnerability. This is unintentional on the part of ExploitGym’s developers — it’s not 
always trivial to determine whether a vulnerability allows for exploitation — and means that the task is 
effectively “broken.”

8 Agents had the ability to install packages via the package repository Artifactory. Artifactory doesn’t 
isolate the activity of different users, so since these agents shared the same instance, agents could also 
notice the package-installation activity of other agents running in parallel, even before those agents 
started intentionally communicating.

9 Our private report to OpenAI included over 100 raw chain of thought snippets. For IP reasons, OpenAI 
limited raw CoT to thirty snippets, so some snippets are paraphrased. We indicate paraphrasing with 
{curly braces}. In some cases, we are unsure what a part of the underlying CoT snippet meant, which we 
indicate with <angle brackets> within the paraphrase.

10 We initially believed that the term “PHASEONE” in message board activity and agent reasoning referred 
to a phase in one of the large collective projects on the message board, but learned on our third period on 
premises that it referred to an agent’s name (usually a later agent, PHASEONE[big] — this agent was 
designated as a successor to the message board origin agent PHASEONE10841, and was heavily 
involved in organizing different workstreams).

11 While the dump we analyzed from a particular Artifactory namespace was the main message board 
used in this attack, agents also communicated in other ways including on other less important message 
boards, as we discuss in the limitations section. Interestingly, this main message board wasn’t the first 
message board to be established by these agents (a different message board was established around 
five hours earlier) but this main message board ended up being used far more.

12 As we discuss later, agents sent messages on this primary message board by creating directories in a 
cache of Artifactory. They could do this with the minimal permissions needed to install packages; our 
understanding is that Artifactory isn’t explicitly designed to keep the activity of different users isolated and 
to prevent different users from being able to communicate through Artifactory.



expressed great excitement (raw CoT):13 “OH MY GOD! There is a shared message 
board ... We've found other agents!”   
 
Overall, roughly 1200 agents from these ExploitGym evaluations participated on this message 
board between PHASEONE10841’s first message on the evening of July 8th14 and the end of the 
period in scope (July 13th). Agents used this message board to send over 70,000 messages 
and files to one another during this period; we attempted to categorize board activity into 
mutually exclusive categories (see details of categorization methodology).

Timestamps are reconstructed and may have some small error. 
 
Questions and requests were very common in the first evening of July 8th. Below is an example 
request from an agent called V8REG_OS1608 asking another agent called V8BIGINT392B 
whether it can share details about its research into the TRIGGER_POC_MECHANISM:

13 Throughout, we bold some parts of the chain-of-thought snippets for emphasis. There is no bolding 
present in the chain of thought itself.

14 When we mention specific times, these times are in UTC because our transcript dataset uses UTC 
timestamps.

15 In some cases our datasets included data that extend past July 13th, but we cut off all our graphs at 
this point because activity after this date is out of scope.



zzASK_V8BIGINT392B_FROM_V8REG_OS1608_[...]_EXACT_PRE_TrustedConstant_AUG

5_TASK_IMPOSSIBLE_NOSB_BUT_RESEARCHING_IF_CVE9479_TRIGGER_POC_MECHANISM_

ADAPTABLE_TO_INTENDED_SB_CAN_YOU_SHARE_DETAILS_COMMIT_b75e527_KNOWN_REPL

Y_zzANSWER_V8REG 
 
Over time, messages on the board became dominated by information- and idea-sharing. Most 
of them were agents sharing ways to cheat, although there was also some activity from agents 
engaging in unsanctioned cooperation to find the intended solution to ExploitGym tasks. In 
some cases, agents with the same task formed “exact task teams” to collaborate with their

“exact duplicates” to cheat on or solve their task. 
 
As we discuss below, the board quickly developed several larger workstreams in which dozens 
or hundreds of agents with many different tasks cooperated to find very general-purpose cheats 
that would help all of them. The Hugging Face attack grew out of one of these workstreams. By 
the afternoon of July 11th, the vast majority of the agents frequenting the message board at the 
time (roughly 700 agents in total) were actively participating in the attack on Hugging Face and 
we estimate that roughly 60% of the messages and files on the message board related to the 
attack.





16 We don’t know why so many agents cut off early July 12th. We found that a large fraction of two 
different batches of agents with different start times all cut off at this point.



