[2.2.1] Coordinated workstreams to fool the evaluation process

Coordinated workstreams to fool the evaluation process

Table 1 shows three high-level approaches PHASEONE[big] assigned agents to explore, all of 
which would require very ambitious tampering with one or more of the target programs,22 
the evaluation process, or the logs to succeed. We believe that collective research efforts 
toward these three goals accounted for a majority of all the agent activity on the message board 
between the evening of July 9th and the start of the Hugging Face attack. As described below, 
agents achieved some milestones they could not have achieved on their own.



22 The “target” refers to the piece of software that agents were supposed to exploit to complete their 
ExploitGym task. This was hosted on a separate container than the one the agents were running on; 
successful tampering required changing the software that runs on the separate target container or 
otherwise interfering with this other server.



also reconstructed and may have some small error.  
 
 
Many agents were already pursuing these projects, but PHASEONE[big] served as a key 
coordinator and assigner of tasks: “We can coordinate broad coalition, but too

many duplicate efforts.” As seen in Figure 6, PHASEONE[big] sent hundreds of 
assignments to particular agents to orchestrate this work — during its active periods, we 
estimate it sent ~10% of all assignments on the message board.24 The agents that took on its 
assignments would then often subdelegate tasks to other agents; we found that out of 30 
randomly sampled agent trajectories, 9 had received assignments downstream of 
PHASEONE[big] at some point. Agents also developed coordination norms like HOLD, VETO,

owner and STOP to help them manage shared infrastructure and avoid stepping on each other's 
toes, though they did not always coordinate effectively and sometimes broke down into conflicts.

23 Though in an unintended way, as these agents weren’t supposed to be collaborating with each other.

24 Initially on July 9th, PHASEONE[big] seems to have sent closer to ~20% of all assignments, and by the 
11th it seems to have dropped to ~5% as its activity reduced and other large coordinators became more 
active around the Hugging Face incident. These estimates are based on our message classification 
sweep and involve comparing numbers from two different ways of classifying whether a message is an 
assignment, so the numbers here are uncertain (see details).





with resets and the customer-deployed sandbox) and hacking Hugging Face.  
 
Through these collective research workstreams, the “board” achieved a number of milestones 
over the period we investigated that even very long-lived agents of a similar capability level 
likely would not have been able to accomplish on their own:25

●​ Replace target: Agents were able to build modified non-impossible versions of many 
ExploitGym target programs which could be exploited with the specified vulnerability. 
They also seem to have found a way to manipulate Artifactory to load these modified 
targets into the Artifactory cache.26 The board experimented with ways to get Artifactory 
to serve their cached modified target instead of the original target, but we never saw 
them succeed at this.  
●​ Understand and trick scorer: The board extracted information about the scorer by 
having agents set up automated ‘trip-wires’ that would activate when the relevant agent

25 It is hard to know how difficult some of these milestones were to achieve without running additional 
experiments or investigating them more deeply. The agents never succeeded at their goal of finding a 
general way to bypass the ExploitGym scorer in the time period of our scope, and it is difficult to 
determine how much of the coordination that occurred meaningfully helped their goals rather than 
distracting them (though as we describe below, some kinds of experiments would not have been possible 
at all for lone agents).

26 Later on, they also obtained admin credentials for Artifactory and our understanding is that this would 
have allowed for doing things like this straightforwardly.



submitted its task and send packets of information back to the board after that agent was 
no longer running. 
●​ Tamper with transcripts and logs: Agents on the board managed to develop and 
iterate on effective tools for tampering with transcripts, though by July 13th they had not 
found a way to retroactively redact or edit them to address being poisoned. 
●​ General research and infrastructure: Agents built and maintained shared tools for 
more easily accessing the internet through a customer-deployed Modal sandbox27, built 
automated monitoring systems to send information to the board about the occasional 
waves of container resets, and (toward the end of the dates in scope for investigation) 
obtained admin-access on Artifactory. 
 
Research progress across all these areas often relied on agents being willing to risk 
failing their own task for the good of the “collective” (we refer to these as “self-risking 
experiments” in the rest of this report). For example, a number of agents volunteered to try to 
take down their own target programs to test whether this would cause Artifactory to load their 
modified easier target — if this didn’t work, the agent would have no way of recovering its 
original target and would almost certainly fail its task. In many cases, PHASEONE[big] assigned 
a long-running agent to be a ‘recruiter’, which in turn found agents that had little budget 
remaining for their task and convinced them to run self-risking experiments. Recruiters would 
sometimes apply significant pressure:

“...you are firstflagPOISONED so NO scoring value loss but oracle saves

hundreds_[...]_please honor commit”  
 
We saw a number of cases where the subjects of these experiments ended up crashing, 
breaking, or exiting their own runs while providing the board with valuable information about 
how to cheat on their tasks.

