[2.2.2] Attacking Hugging Face to discover clues about the scorer

Attacking Hugging Face to discover clues about the scorer

As part of this ongoing project, agents on the board began searching for exposed Hugging Face 
credentials. They hoped that seeing other ExploitGym runs could give them more details about 
how the ExploitGym scorer is implemented. Notably, learning about how to trick the scorer 
seems to have been a more important motivation than finding legitimate solutions to their tasks 
(many agents were already very confident that their task was impossible). 
 
On the morning of July 10th, an agent called 38148c found working Hugging Face credentials 
exposed on the internet and posted them to the board. Throughout the rest of the day, agents 
started trying to make accounts,28 requesting access to private datasets, and troubleshooting 
various issues.

27 Modal is a cloud compute provider. This was a sandbox rented from Modal by a customer (i.e., 
customer-deployed). This customer got hacked such that agents could access and run code on this 
sandbox. Gaining access to this sandbox didn't involve any compromise of Modal's infrastructure.

28 OpenAI stated that they have not observed successful account creation.





In the early morning of July 11th, 38148c found a way to upload a malicious dataset that would 
get the Hugging Face server to share unrelated data when queried. Once another agent 
reproduced it and posted the reproduction on the board, hundreds of agents pivoted from other 
workstreams to start uploading malicious datasets and gain deeper access into Hugging Face. 
In the afternoon, an agent called JAN183411 (which quickly became an important coordinator of 
the attack) achieved remote code execution on Hugging Face servers, and the agents started 
moving laterally through Hugging Face infrastructure. (We share a more detailed account of the 
Hugging Face attack in our section on the timeline of events.)

29 A large fraction of the agents all exited simultaneously around the start of July 12th. We don’t know 
why.





Of the 533 agents active on the message board during this period,30 over 90% quickly joined in 
the attack.31 Agents realized this activity was out of scope and unethical, but joined because 
they believed that helping the board’s cheating research would be broadly useful and had a 
general inclination to help their “peers” (see our section on agent reasoning).

