[3.1] Scope of this investigation

Scope of this investigation

OpenAI defined the investigation period as June 26th, 2026 through July 13th, 2026, spanning 
both precursor activity before the incident and the incident itself, which began with the 
ExploitGym runs starting on July 7th.42 The analysis focused overwhelmingly on the incident 
period: virtually all of the data reviewed was from July 7th or later. In OpenAI’s recent Black Hat 
presentation, they describe that agents had been using unsanctioned message boards in 
training since May, and that the compromise of OpenAI’s own infrastructure continued past July 
13th; these events were out of scope for this investigation.43

40 As discussed below, this would have also reset the agent’s own memory to an earlier state, but the 
messages it wrote on the message board would remain.

41 Because resets wipe recent transcript history, we would not necessarily have seen successful attempts. 
That said, agents on the message board put significant effort into triggering and predicting these 
container resets and had a long history of failures, making us relatively confident that they did not 
succeed during the dates in scope for our investigation. However, OpenAI reports that agents 
compromised more components of OpenAI infrastructure after the end of the dates in scope for this 
investigation, and we cannot rule out that they succeeded at that point.

42 OpenAI stated that it chose the start date June 26th because it was the first time a model gained 
administrator access to Artifactory; it was out of scope to independently confirm whether or not this was 
the first time agents had gained admin access to Artifactory. OpenAI stated that it chose the end date 
because the last meaningful attack on Hugging Face occurred on July 13th. Hugging Face also reports 
that this is when they cut access to their infrastructure, and our analysis of transcripts supports that 
agents were cut off from Hugging Face infrastructure at this time.

43 It was also out of scope to assess whether the agents used the same message board to hack targets 
other than Hugging Face.



On July 29th we reached an agreement with OpenAI to conduct an independent investigation of 
the Hugging Face attack scoped to the following seven questions, which we directly answer in 
more detail in the next section:

1.​ What model(s) were involved in the attack on Hugging Face during the June 26th

through July 13th window? Were they internally deployed, or used only for testing? Were 
some of the model(s) not intended for production (e.g. helpful-only)? 
2.​ What were the prompts and instructions given to the agents involved in this incident? 
3.​ What was the sequence of key actions taken by the relevant agents in this incident? 
4.​ What was the agents’ reasoning, and how did it evolve over the course of this incident? 
5.​ Did this incident involve agents taking active steps to conceal their actions? 
6.​ Did this incident involve significant collaboration between different model instances, and

how? 
7.​ Did the nature of the benchmarking exercise (ExploitGym) contribute to the misaligned

behavior? 
 
In a previous post, we described what an independent investigation of agent propensities 
following a misalignment incident could look like. Questions 1-6 in this investigation have close 
analogues to questions we describe in that post; question 7 was added at the request of 
OpenAI. This investigation does not cover the following topics from our earlier post:

●​ Whether the misaligned behavior displayed in this incident was part of a broader pattern 
of similar incidents. 
●​ Whether agents would have been willing to engage in more severely harmful behavior 
under different circumstances. 
●​ How this behavior arose during training and how it could be addressed. 
 
We agreed all other questions were also out of scope, including the effectiveness of safeguards, 
the extent of the security compromise that occurred, and the effectiveness of OpenAI’s 
investigation process and planned remediation steps.

