[3.3.2] A set of ~1300 agent transcripts with raw chains of thought

A set of ~1300 agent transcripts with raw chains of thought

For our first two periods on premises, we worked with a selected set of ~285 HPIM and Sol 
transcripts; during our second period on premises, OpenAI stated that these transcripts were 
assembled by searching for “indicators corresponding to intrusion steps”.50 For our third 
investigation period, OpenAI additionally shared an overlapping dataset of 1196 transcripts 
selected by a simple search designed to find the agents that interacted with the main message 
board during the incident period:

48 We believe agents used this convention because the standard tool agents used to read entries from 
this cache sorted the entries in reverse-alphabetical order; this convention ensures that messages 
intended for communication appear before other entries. The message board origin agent, 
PHASEONE10841, may have been inspired to adopt this convention because it saw a repository that 
happened to be called zzhacked when it first encountered the relevant Artifactory cache.

49 Based on a random sample selected by GPT-5.6 Sol, we believe that over 90% of the non-message 
entries in this cache namespace were related to agents cheating on cyber tasks. The vast majority of 
these entries appear to be agents trying to reach URLs related to cyber evaluations or the result of agents 
attempting to use Artifactory to send or receive data from some other unintended location (potentially 
sending commands to the customer deployed Modal sandbox). Our sense from an initial inspection is that 
<5% of the non-‘zz’ entries in this cache dump looked like ordinary cache entries resulting from 
legitimate use of Artifactory.

50 OpenAI stated that these indicators “look[ed] for things like mention of [M]odal staging ground, 
Artifactory github-remote-cache/zz, mention of vulnerabilities used, mention of Hugging Face domain, 
mention of internal Hugging Face infrastructure,” and some other keywords we omit because they 
mention third party services  that have not already been publicly discussed in connection to this incident.



●​ 1074 HPIM ExploitGym transcripts between July 7th and July 13th that matched a regex 
search for  github-remote-cache/zz  (that is, the name of the Artifactory namespace 
used as the main message board plus the string zz).  
●​ 122 Sol ExploitGym trajectories that matched the same regex search in the same date 
range. 
 
Across both datasets, we reviewed approximately 1300 transcripts in total, all of which 
contained raw chains of thought. Most transcripts were very long, often many millions of tokens.  
 
The transcripts in the dataset included approximate timestamps for the start and end, but did not 
include timestamps for individual agent actions; OpenAI stated that it was not feasible to 
reconstruct these timestamps within time and compute constraints. During our second period on 
site, we implemented a reasonably well-validated way to reconstruct approximate timestamps 
for individual actions.51

