[3.4.1.2] Many of our transcripts are missing small components, and a small number of relevant agents may not be included in our dataset

Many of our transcripts are missing small components, and a small number of relevant 
agents may not be included in our dataset

Fraction of relevant agent activity captured in the transcript dataset 
To determine what fraction of agent activity we had in our dataset, we randomly sampled 100 
non-file messages sent between July 7th and July 13th. For each message, we tried to locate 
the action that wrote it among our transcripts. Based on this message tracing, we believe that

52 In fact, the first active message board used by agents in these ExploitGym runs was in a different place 
on Artifactory (using the approach of requesting discussion pages), and was active five hours before 
PHASEONE10841 established the main message board.

53 OpenAI’s Black Hat presentation describes agents using ‘organization 1’ to store shared files. More 
broadly, multiple researchers we spoke to said that the models involved had a general tendency to create 
and use several kinds of improvised, unauthorized messageboards since at least May 2026, and such 
improvised message boards have also been reported in other incidents involving other companies’ 
agents.

54 We think this is unlikely because in the examples we’ve seen, agents do not seem to succeed at 
successfully deleting messages, and our understanding is that there was not much need or incentive to 
do this. However, OpenAI stated in its Black Hat talk AI agents had “obtained admin permissions on [a 
cluster that was running Artifactory] and accessible credentials” by July 19th, likely making message 
deletion / editing relatively feasible. Our filesystem dump was retrieved after this point, so any deletions or 
modifications agents made on the 19th may have affected our data. We didn’t have access to transcripts 
from this period or that were involved in this hack of OpenAI infrastructure; thus we did not check for this.



the agents in our dataset were responsible for well over 95% of relevant message board activity 
in this date range.  
 
 
However, the majority of our transcripts appear to be missing a small amount of activity from 
that agent. This appears to be due in part to container resets, and an unknown fraction of our 
transcripts appear to be cut off early. As a result, we believe that we have a bit over 90% of the 
agent activity on the message board between July 7th and July 13th (see methodology details in 
this appendix). 
 
Integrity of records in the transcript dataset 
OpenAI attested that the transcripts we reviewed were unredacted, and we did not notice 
evidence of redaction. However, as we discuss above, we estimate that over 7% of the 
transcripts in our dataset contained intentionally spoofed tool calls in some places. All the cases 
of successful tool call spoofing we found were small-scale tests of the techniques and obvious 
to spot. We looked for and did not find transcripts with more subtle spoofing, or cases in which 
agents spoofed a large number of tool calls to achieve a downstream goal.55 Separately, many 
poisoned agents were intent on editing or deleting transcript logs after the fact, and while we did 
not detect any case where they succeeded we cannot rule out that they succeeded at some 
point.56

