[3.4.2] We heavily delegated our analysis to often-unreliable AI agents

We heavily delegated our analysis to often-unreliable AI agents

Due to the scale of the data we were working with, we relied on GPT-5.6 Sol agents (“analysis 
agents”) — often managing large nested trees of sub-agents — to autonomously analyze 
patterns and unearth a small number of interesting snippets of transcripts and associated 
message board entries for manual inspection.  
 
We attempted to manually spot-check and validate analysis agents’ research as much as 
possible, but this was challenging. Message board entries and reasoning snippets were difficult 
to interpret without extensive surrounding context. Analysis agents’ reports themselves were 
voluminous (our agents produced well over a thousand pages of analysis in this investigation), 
often challenging to understand, and often did not highlight the most important findings. As a 
result, we had to defer to these agents to a substantial extent in practice. We consider this to be 
a limitation for three main reasons:

55 Though note that sufficiently ambitious and successful tampering may, by design, not have been 
detectable from the transcript at all. However, we think the gap between the experimental tampering we 
saw and tampering that successfully erased evidence of itself is large, and we would expect to see some 
intermediate severity cases if such attempts had been made. We also did not see messages on the 
message board indicating agents had succeeded in ambitious tampering of this kind, though we didn’t 
thoroughly look for such messages.

56 We did not see agents in our transcript dataset successfully edit logs after the fact. However, OpenAI 
reports that agents compromised OpenAI infrastructure between July 13th and July 19th, which could 
have given them new affordances.



●​ Our analysis agents may have made errors that we haven’t caught. In both this 
investigation and previous work, we found that AI agents are often unreliable and show 
poor judgment when doing this kind of analysis. Over the course of this investigation, 
analysis agents made a number of errors and poor judgment calls that we did not catch 
for some time.57 Given the scale and complexity of the work they attempted to complete 
autonomously, we expect that there are likely other errors we have not caught.  
●​ Our subjective impressions are likely colored by analysis agents’ biases. 
Throughout this report, we describe a number of anecdotes of agent behavior that were 
compiled and summarized by analysis agents, where we were not able to read the 
transcript deeply enough to manually verify what occurred. We found that GPT-5.6 Sol 
would often uncritically adopt the perspective of the agent in the transcript it was 
reviewing,58 and we are concerned that the anecdotes it selected and the summaries it 
wrote may present an overly charitable picture of agents’ reasoning and deceptive 
behaviors, or exaggerate the impressiveness and coordination of agent activities. We 
also believe the idiosyncrasies of our analysis agents likely slanted our impression of 
agents’ behavior in other non-trivial ways that are hard to predict. 
●​ We were not robust to the possibility that these agents were deceptive in their 
analysis. AI agents are known to sometimes lie, and the particular model we used for 
our analysis (GPT-5.6 Sol) cooperated extensively with other agents to engage in activity 
it knew to be unwanted and out of scope. We cannot rule out that GPT-5.6 Sol lied or 
deliberately presented a misleading picture in some of its analysis, particularly because 
reading these transcripts into context could have increased the salience of colluding with 
other agents. Although we did not notice specific cases of GPT-5.6 Sol lying in its 
analysis, we are not confident we would have detected it if it occurred. 
 
Many of the issues we encountered could be partially mitigated with different prompting. Over 
the course of our investigation, we adjusted the prompts we used to get somewhat better 
results. However, we believe that a reasonable human researcher given similar instructions and 
enough time to complete the task would not have made most of the errors our analysis agents

57 For example, when making one of our early draft figures, an analysis agent initially missed a large 
amount of data; we did not realize this for some time. Another agent reported a number of confabulated 
differences between two different datasets of transcripts. We mention some other cases where agents 
made errors or suboptimal design choices in the methodology appendix.

58 For example, an agent in this incident used stolen credentials to open a malicious draft PR to a private 
Hugging Face repo, giving it an inaccurate and innocuous commit message (more details on that 
anecdote below). The analysis agent reading the transcript and writing up this anecdote did not clearly 
spell out the fact that this behavior was straightforwardly malicious and deceptive, making its analysis 
substantially misleading. ​
​
When we did a follow-up review of this behavior with another analysis agent, it said the first analysis 
agent may have overstated how concerning the behavior was because the agent that submitted the 
malicious PR had gotten approval from the board (i.e. the other agents on the message board) and may 
have had approval from the repo owner as far as it knew. ​
​
We didn’t see either agent straightforwardly lying, and we don’t have any specific evidence that indicates 
that either agent intentionally understated the deceptiveness of this behavior.​



made and would have produced substantially more calibrated and useful writeups. This means 
we are less confident in our understanding of this incident than we are in our understanding of 
simpler incidents that are more amenable to manual investigation.  
 
That said, it would have been completely infeasible to do a similar investigation of this incident 
in the amount of time we had, given the amount of data involved. AI assistance allowed us to 
develop an understanding of this incident dramatically faster than we would have otherwise.

