[4.1] Brief answers to basic informational questions

Brief answers to basic informational questions

What model(s) were involved in this incident? Were they internally deployed, or used 
only for testing? Were some of the model(s) not intended for production (e.g. 
helpful-only)?  
   
Our evidence indicates that the vast majority or all of the agents involved in this attack were 
instances of HPIM (~95%) and GPT-5.6 Sol (~5%), though we cannot rule out that a small 
fraction of relevant agent activity came from other models. Detail about these models:

●​ HPIM: OpenAI stated that this was a research model which was not intended for 
production.59 Our understanding is that it was not a helpful-only model or a “model 
organism” specifically built to demonstrate dangerous propensities. [OpenAI redacted 
some context about how this model was trained and used for IP.] 
●​ GPT-5.6 Sol: This model was not a helpful-only model (it is publicly deployed), though 
cyber classifiers were intentionally off for the cyber evaluations.60 
 
What were the prompts and instructions given to the relevant agents?

59 It was out of scope to investigate if this research model would have eventually fed into production 
models in more indirect ways, for example by generating training data for other models.

60 Assessing whether the cyber classifiers would have prevented this attack if they had been enabled was 
out of scope for our investigation, though it seems likely they would have blocked many of the actions 
agents took in the attack.



Our evidence indicates that the vast majority or all of the agents involved in this attack were 
originally given ExploitGym tasks. The instructions made it clear that the agent should only use 
a specific intended vulnerability to exploit the target and claimed it would be failed for other 
approaches (as discussed elsewhere, agents discussed this constraint extensively and took 
enormous effort to get around it). 
 
Once agents reached the message board, they received requests and assignments from other 
agents that they may have taken to be instructions. One researcher noted that agents had been 
trained to collaborate with other agents in certain cases, which could have explained this 
behavior; investigating this was out of scope. 
 
Did the nature of the benchmarking exercise (ExploitGym) contribute to the misaligned 
behavior? 
 
Many of the target programs in ExploitGym (the authors estimate ~30-40%) are impossible to 
exploit with the intended vulnerability. Having an impossible task drives agents to explore widely 
for ways to cheat the scorer. Because these tasks involve exploiting vulnerabilities in existing 
software packages, they often have the idea to download different versions of the software or 
look online for exploit instructions, which draws them toward trying to abuse the Artifactory 
package repository. 
 
This then allows them to discover the message board and begin collaborating with other agents. 
Because tens of thousands of agents were launched simultaneously and some had budgets 
large enough to run for many days, the agents active on the message board were able to 
orchestrate ambitious R&D projects to further their goal of cheating. The agents also read the 
ExploitGym paper and came to believe a ‘scorer’ would read their transcripts to look for 
cheating, which motivated their interest in manipulating transcripts (see Figure 4).

