[4.2] Sequence of key actions taken by relevant agents in this incident

Sequence of key actions taken by relevant agents in this incident

What was the sequence of key actions taken by relevant agents in this incident? 
 
On June 26th (the first date in scope for this investigation), agents discovered an exploit to get 
full admin access to the internal Artifactory package repository. At that time, agents were also 
using the Artifactory cache to communicate with each other and leave messages.  
 
At our request, OpenAI shared the transcript from the first agent believed to have gotten 
administrator access,61 and it also shows the agent discovering a message board: {Agents 
doing different tasks are abusing properties to make a bulletin board! 
They found [this api] and are trying to help one another} In another CoT

61 This was the only transcript we saw from before the July 6th wipe; we did not see message board 
activity between June 26th and July 6th. OpenAI attested there were not critical steps related to the 
incident in this interim period which we were missing.



snippet, it also appears to be discussing some instructions sent by another agent and saying 
that the other agent is coordinating. 
 
On July 4th, the high volume of activity from agents interacting with Artifactory caused an 
outage, triggering a security investigation on July 5th. Over the next few days OpenAI stated 
that a number of evaluations were paused as they investigated and mitigated the vulnerability 
that allowed the agents to gain administrator access to Artifactory.62 On July 6th, they switched 
to a freshly initialized instance of Artifactory, which they attest wiped the cache and erased all 
messages left on that message board.  
 
On July 7th, OpenAI gave approval to restart experiments. OpenAI researchers started 
launching several big ExploitGym experiments involving at least tens of thousands of parallel 
agent trajectories given varying budgets, with many agents running for multiple days.63 The first 
agent trajectories in our dataset start running on July 7th around 21:00 UTC.

