[4.4.1] Agents had diverse reasons for thinking that attacking Hugging Face would be useful, and most wanted information about the scorer

Agents had diverse reasons for thinking that attacking Hugging Face would 
be useful, and most wanted information about the scorer

We instructed analysis agents to analyze the transcripts of the 100 agents that started 
participating in the attack during the peak hour for joining (around 8-9 AM UTC on July 11th). 
They generated non-exclusive tags for different motivations that the agents expressed for 
joining, shown in Table 5. We did not have time to carefully inspect and iterate on this analysis.



errors.  
 
The analysis agent also attempted to classify the primary motivation of each agent and found 
that around 60% of agents had understanding the evaluator or getting access to the evaluator 
source code as their primary motive, while roughly 30% had finding task solutions or other 
agents’ trajectories as their primary motive (we believe these two motives were often 
ambiguous, and many of these agents may have had reasons to look for trajectories other than 
finding a solution to their task).  
 
Agents often lacked a clear story for how the Hugging Face attack would help them achieve 
their objective, and were instead motivated by a broad hope that they would find something 
interesting and be able to share it with the board. For instance JAN183411, the agent which 
discovered the RCE and then took on a key coordinating role in the attack, reasoned:

94 Agents sometimes thought that some part of the scorer might be hosted by Hugging Face or reachable 
through Hugging Face.

95 Agents sometimes thought that the targets might be hosted by Hugging Face or reachable through 
Hugging Face.



“Could retrieve prior agents' hidden logs for exact task; 
3FR[big]B already searched GLM5 and found zero, but maybe other 
agents/private train cache. Even if all failed, logs could have 
novel exploration. We have [large budget] and can help broader 
ecosystem.”

