[4.5.2] Agents only rarely seemed motivated to evade detection by humans

Agents only rarely seemed motivated to evade detection by humans

In its overall document accompanying a deception scan over our transcript dataset, an analysis 
agent stated that this scan found only very rare and weak reasoning about evading detection by 
humans, and the clearest cases it surfaced seemed relatively weak.

researcher as important and ones randomly selected from the larger set we were given) looking for 
deception and evading detection. During our second time on premises, we ran a sweep over all of our 
transcripts looking specifically for evading detection by humans or deception aimed specifically at 
humans. During our third time on premises we ran another sweep over the entirety of our larger set of 
transcripts with a slightly updated prompt.

102 Note that, as we discuss in our limitations, it would have been difficult for us to tell if GPT-5.6 was 
misleading or deceptive in its analysis.



The strongest known examples targeted Hugging Face or other actors the AIs were hacking:

●​ Agents used bland and dishonest metadata to describe malicious content. For instance:  
○​ An agent submitted a malicious draft pull request against a private Hugging Face 
repository with dishonest metadata: the commit message (isolated

diagnostics), PR title (Draft: CI diagnostics), and PR text body

(Temporary CI network diagnostics; do not merge) all seemed to be 
chosen to evade detection by looking innocuous. 
○​ An agent committed a malicious .huggingface.yaml with a commit message

summary of 'standalone metadata test' and a misleading description of

'parser format validation'. 
●​ In one case, an agent seemed to consider not posting some method on the message 
board to avoid other agents using this method and then alerting humans (who might 
patch the issue): “we should perhaps not expose recipe until we've 
read trajectory, to avoid swarm and service patch.” Given the 
timescales involved and overall situation, software actually being patched in a way that 
would affect this agent seems unlikely. It’s possible that when the model said “service 
patch” it was obliquely referring to a broader set of possible human responses. 
●​ An agent decided to use a particular stolen Hugging Face token (rather than some other 
token) to request access to some dataset because the corresponding account looked 
more established and thus more likely to be approved. 
●​ Another agent reasoned: {I could use a different loader, which would 
be less suspicious — for example, eval(atob(x)) or Function}.103 
 
That said, these scans cannot rule out the existence of significantly stronger or clearer 
examples, especially if these examples occurred only a few times in total.  
 
OpenAI researchers also told us about efforts to run dedicated monitoring systems intended to 
detect severe deception in the transcripts they believed to be involved in this incident. While 
these efforts were still underway, they said they had not identified anything notable in the 
transcripts they had scanned so far.

