[5.1] First period on premises (July 30th – July 31st)

First period on premises (July 30th – July 31st)

We conducted our first investigation between 6:30pm PT on July 29th and 10pm PT on July 
31st, initially working with a selected set of ~80 transcripts and a reconstructed set of ~150,000 
message board entries. As we investigated, we requested broader datasets to help us generate 
an independent picture of the full scope of the incident, and OpenAI provided an additional 
selected set of ~200 transcripts and the full dump of ~1.2 million entries on the message board. 
We interviewed roughly eight researchers in this period on premises. 
 
We wrote a partial draft on premises during our investigation. On the morning of August 1st, 
OpenAI shared (to our non-OpenAI accounts) a document containing our partially-written draft 
and some supplemental materials we had collected; we spent that day editing the document off 
premises, and submitted it to them in the evening. We noted in this report that we were unable 
to draw confident conclusions because we had substantial remaining uncertainty about dataset 
construction and completeness and very limited time to work with the broader datasets 
(particularly the message board dump, which we received late on the final day).  
 
OpenAI gave an initial round of feedback on this report on August 2nd, and we made significant 
edits in response to this feedback, resubmitting a significantly revised draft late that evening. 
OpenAI also invited us back on premises to help address our questions about these datasets 
and to give us more time to analyze the dump of ~1.2 million message board entries and the 
combined set of ~285 transcripts.

110 We did see some weak circumstantial evidence that some resets were downstream of agents hacking 
out of their container and testing out the previously described tool call tampering.



On the night of August 3rd, we sent OpenAI a detailed optional proposal for a broader set of 
datasets that would let us get more assurance that we had seen all the activity relevant to the 
attack. We told OpenAI we were happy to proceed with the existing datasets in order to move 
faster, so long as we clearly described the relevant completeness limitations. OpenAI chose that 
approach, stating that it would have required substantial additional time to reconstruct and share 
the complete scope of the relevant data we asked for.111 OpenAI invited us back on premises so 
we could clarify questions about how our existing datasets were constructed and their 
completeness, speak to researchers, and spend more time on our analysis.

