[5.2] Second period on premises (August 5th – August 6th)

Second period on premises (August 5th – August 6th)

OpenAI invited us back on premises to clarify questions we had about our existing datasets, 
speak to researchers, and spend more time on our analysis. In this second period on premises 
(August 5th and August 6th), we were able to reconstruct and decode many files shared on the 
message board, determine approximate timestamps for our transcripts, start tracing messages 
to agents that wrote and read them, and run classifier sweeps over the full set of ~285 
transcripts we had at the time. We formed a better understanding of agents’ reasoning around 
ethical constraints, and mapped out the basic categories of messages on the message board 
and the evolution of coordination technologies on the message board. However, we were still 
very unsure how sophisticated this coordination was. 
 
We submitted a significantly expanded and revised report to OpenAI on the night of August 7th. 
While we had formed a substantially better understanding of the incident, we noted as a 
limitation that we could be missing important events because our analysis suggested the 
selected set of ~285 transcripts contained a minority of the agent activity related to the attack.112 
On August 12th, OpenAI shared feedback and redactions on this revised report, as well as a 
replication of our analysis indicating the fraction of agent activity in our dataset was roughly 
30%113 and invited us back on premises to analyze a more complete set they had collected. 
 
On August 13th, we made edits in response to this feedback (submitting a revised report to 
OpenAI that evening) and sent OpenAI a detailed proposal, based on our earlier proposal, for 
the information and datasets we would need to be able to verify the completeness of this larger

111 On our third period on premises, OpenAI shared a set of transcripts that (while narrower than what we 
described in our proposal) we believe are relatively close to complete within the defined scope of the 
incident, as we discuss in the limitations section.

112 We randomly sampled 100 non-file messages and traced them to agents that wrote and read them and 
used this context to determine whether the message was related to the Hugging Face attack, finding that 
for 15 Hugging Face related messages, we were only able to find the agent that wrote them in our initial 
transcript set in three cases. OpenAI later did a more detailed search that found 6 out of 15 of these 
messages being written in these ~285 transcripts.

113  OpenAI replicated our analysis with a large sample size: they took 2000 randomly sampled non-file 
messages, then narrowed this down to a subset of around 300 messages very clearly focused on 
attacking Hugging Face. Out of these, they were able to trace 25% of these to the writing agent in our set 
of ~285 transcripts. Due to some false negatives, the actual fraction of these messages written in this set 
of transcripts is probably slightly higher.



set of transcripts. On August 14th, OpenAI replied that they could provide most of the data and 
information in this new proposal.

