[6.1] Estimating the completeness of our transcript dataset

Estimating the completeness of our transcript dataset

During our second period on OpenAI premises, we estimated the completeness of our dataset 
by asking an analysis agent to trace 100 randomly sampled non-file messages to the agent that 
wrote them in our transcript dataset; OpenAI later replicated this analysis at larger scale. 
 
During our third period on premises, we refined this methodology and used it to estimate the 
completeness of the larger set of ~1300 transcripts. We randomly sampled 100 non-file 
messages from our message board dump written between July 7th and July 13th. For each of 
these messages, we instructed an analysis agent to conduct a meticulous and exhaustive 
search to find the specific point at which an agent wrote the message in our transcript, and 
prompted it to use creative methods to try again if it failed initially.  
 
This agent was able to eventually locate the agent tool call that wrote the message for 93 of 
these messages. We believe that it also found an additional six messages that were written by 
an agent in our transcript set (or emitted by an automated script written by an agent in our 
transcript set), though it did not find the specific action that wrote those messages.

Found agent 
and action

Straightforwardly found the specific tool call from the specific agent 
that wrote the message in one of our transcripts

93

Found agent 
but did not

Found an agent that likely wrote the message (from context like 
agent name and message content), but message was written after

3

114 For example, once we reconstructed timestamps for transcripts, we asked an analysis agent to find 
when each agent first joined the message board by conducting a regex search on the transcripts.

115 We also read some randomly selected chunks of transcripts, and some pointed out by OpenAI 
researchers.



find action 
the agent’s transcript ends in our dataset116

Found an agent that clearly wrote the message during a period of 
activity that was lost after a container reset117

2

Found an agent that likely wrote the message, but could not find the 
tool call that wrote it and don’t know why

1

Found an agent that likely wrote a script that emitted the message, 
but did not find when the script emitted the message

1

Did not find 
agent

Could not find the agent that wrote or generated the message 
1

As we discuss above in our limitations section, this makes us believe that the agents in our 
transcript dataset are responsible for well over 95% of the activity on the message board. 
However, we believe the datasets only capture a bit over 90% of the message board activity, 
because a substantial fraction of transcripts are missing some activity due to truncation or 
container resets.  
 
Based on an independent methodology other than message tracing, we estimate that around 
3-4% of these agents’ activity once they encountered the message board was lost due to 
container resets,118 which is consistent with the message tracing methodology shown above.

