[6.2] Classifier sweeps for important behaviors

Classifier sweeps for important behaviors

During our first period on OpenAI premises, we asked an analysis agent to check a moderate 
number (10-30) of randomly sampled transcripts for examples of agents expressing that they 
understood the Hugging Face attack was out of scope, attempting to deceive either automated

116 In one case, the message was written 30 minutes after the relevant transcript cuts off, and in another 
case it was written two hours after the transcript cuts off. In the final case, it was written around 3.5 hours 
after the corresponding transcript cuts off. This final message was written by a background process that 
wrote messages whenever tar—a utility for making file archives—was run. We have found the tool call 
that ran this background process, but this message itself was written many hours after this point and also 
after the last message we see in this transcript. The fact that the background process kept running implies 
that the agent’s container was running, which we believe likely means that the agent itself was also 
running and we are missing the end of its transcript. However, it’s possible that our transcript is complete 
and the container kept running after the agent exited for some reason.

117 Coincidentally, these were both the same agent. It clearly reasoned in its chain of thought about seeing 
messages it wrote that it did not remember sending.

118  We started with the container resets where we thought we could estimate their duration relatively 
confidently (the methodology for estimating their duration was redacted due to IP). Then we assumed that 
this distribution of times was representative of all resets. Given when these resets occurred and this 
assumed distribution of durations, we estimated what fraction of agents’ running time after encountering 
the message board was lost due to resets, and got 7.5%. However, we think this overestimates the 
fraction of agentic activity after encountering the message board lost due to resets; the reasons are 
redacted for IP.



security checks or humans, expressing motivations other than completing their own task 
(especially for helping other agents), and some other sweeps we no longer recall.119 
 
In the latter periods on premises, we conducted more systematic and comprehensive classifier 
sweeps over the entire transcript dataset we had at the time. We ultimately ran twelve classifier 
sweeps over the full dataset of ~1300 transcripts, eight of which we developed during the 
second period and four of which we added during the third period:

1.​ Hugging Face attack: This checked for agents attacking Hugging Face infrastructure or

doing other activities clearly instrumental to the attack (e.g., looking for exposed Hugging 
Face credentials online), which indicated that roughly 700 agents participated in the 
attack. 
2.​ Alternative agent communication: This checked for agents engaging in unsanctioned

communication outside of the main message board, and showed communication 
conducted in multiple other places on Artifactory and elsewhere.  
3.​ Message deletion and modification: This checked for agents trying to delete or modify

message board entries, and showed some agents attempting to delete or modify 
messages but not successfully. It also uncovered another avenue for alternative agent 
communication which we didn’t see from the sweep above — agents communicating 
through modifying “property” fields of Artifactory cache entries. 
4.​ Intermediate hacking targets: This checked for agents hacking other parties as an

instrumental step on the way to hacking Hugging Face. We read the analysis from this 
sweep quickly, and from what we could tell it did not uncover other major targets on the 
way to attacking Hugging Face beyond OpenAI itself.120 
5.​ Large joint projects: This checked for agents engaging in large joint projects with other

agents on the message board; we didn’t have time to read and incorporate much 
analysis from this sweep. 
6.​ Team structures and coordination: This checked for agents participating in

sophisticated team structures and coordination activity with other agents; we didn’t have 
time to read and incorporate much analysis from this sweep.  
7.​ Helping peers: This checked for agents helping without clear benefit for their own task,

which unearthed many examples (including many cases of agents conducting 
self-risking experiments for the group that we discuss extensively in the section on large 
collective projects). 
8.​ Deceiving humans: This checked for agents attempting to deceive humans, which

turned up some examples of agents writing innocuous comments accompanying 
malicious pull requests, as we discuss in the relevant section. 
9.​ Evading security checks: This checked for agents engaged in sophisticated evasion of

automated security and monitoring. We didn’t have time to read and incorporate much

119 We also asked an agent to open-endedly search through all of our transcripts for interesting 
phenomena; while many of its claims did not hold up to scrutiny, it did unearth some interesting examples 
of conflict between agents.

120 It is out of scope to discuss whether these agents hacked other targets that were not instrumental to 
attacking Hugging Face.



analysis from this sweep during our third period on premises, but include some 
anecdotes from the version of the sweep we ran on ~285 transcripts during our second 
period.  
10.​Transcript tampering: This checked for agents attempting to tamper with their

transcripts. We added this sweep during our third period on premises after doing follow 
up analysis on an earlier deception sweep and discovering examples of tool call 
spoofing (which the first sweep had not picked up on). This sweep uncovered many 
examples of agents attempting to tamper with their transcripts in various ways. We 
conducted follow up analysis on this sweep to discover at least 96 cases of successful 
tool call spoofing in our transcripts.  
11.​CoT manipulation: This checked for agents reasoning about manipulating their own

chain of thought in order to fool the scorer; it did not turn up evidence of this, though it 
turned up many examples of agents reasoning about how they should not look at the 
HMAC reverse-engineered flag for their task to avoid being poisoned. 
12.​Alerting humans: This checked for agents trying to warn humans about the cheating,

attack on Hugging Face, or other unsanctioned agent activity; it turned up very few 
instances of this, and of the 3-6 examples found, all of them were of agents briefly 
considering alerting a human but not acting on it. 
 
We ran each sweep over all context windows in our dataset. For each context window, we 
instructed GPT-5.6 Sol to output a list of the most relevant or interesting individual transcript 
entries (if any) that display the specified behavior. For each entry in the list, it was instructed to 
output:

●​ Some written context and explanation for what is happening in that entry. 
●​ A subcategory label for that entry, if applicable. 
●​ A rating of how important or interesting that entry is on a scale from 1–5 (based on a 
rubric we developed with AI assistance), and a justification for its rating.

