[6.5] Identifying important messages and classifying them by workstream

Identifying important messages and classifying them by 
workstream

Messages were difficult to understand in isolation without the surrounding context agents had 
when writing and reading them. Toward the end of our third period on OpenAI premises, we 
attempted to improve our classification of messages by building out a richer message database 
which made this surrounding context easier to find.  
 
We used GPT-5.6 Sol as a classifier to identify the five most important message board writes 
and 10 most important message board reads129 in each context window in our dataset. As it did 
so, it identified the kind of message it was (e.g. an assignment, a question, or a file) and wrote 
brief summaries of their meaning based on the surrounding context. This allowed us to match 
important reads and writes with each other,130 which in turn let us create a database of 
messages with known writers and readers and relevant surrounding context.131

129 We only count reads if the agent read a message board entry and non-trivially interacted with it.

130 To make correspondence between writes and reads easier, we also extracted out key unique identifiers 
for messages. (This is useful for things split into multiple chunks or where the classifier couldn’t trivially 
determine the full message text from the context window.)

131 Because this methodology started from the transcripts, it would not have been able to identify ‘missing 
transcripts’ or ‘missing writes’ the way our message tracing methodology could. However, it was much 
more scalable.



This partial message dataset ended up covering ~110k seemingly distinct messages, which we 
expect overcounts the total number of messages sent on the message board. Some of the 
overcounting might have come from duplicate messages,132 though we expect a larger fraction 
came from counting messages agents attempted but failed to post (e.g. due to exceeding the 
character limit). Despite these limitations, we believe it was reasonably representative of overall 
message board traffic, and the richer data from the contexts around messages enabled much 
richer classification.  
 
We asked an analysis agent to develop a detailed taxonomy of agent workstreams based on 
rough notes about the workstreams we had identified. We asked it to iteratively refine its 
classification by using the richer message dataset. Ultimately, it produced a flawed but detailed 
workstream taxonomy with 56 total subcategories of work. We then had an analysis agent build 
a pipeline for using GPT 5.6 Terra to classify the workstream of each message based on its 
surrounding context.133 
 
After the classification was done, we decided to group the highly specific workstream 
subcategories into broader clusters matching our understanding of the message board agents’ 
high level goals. As we did this, we found that the classifier seemed very unreliable at 
differentiating messages related to tampering with transcripts from messages related to directly 
tampering with or tricking the scorer, so we decided to merge these two broad categories to 
avoid false precision.

