[3] BERT

3
BERT

We introduce BERT and its detailed implementa-
tion in this section. There are two steps in our
framework: pre-training and fine-tuning.
Dur-
ing pre-training, the model is trained on unlabeled
data over different pre-training tasks.
For fine-
tuning, the BERT model is first initialized with
the pre-trained parameters, and all of the param-
eters are fine-tuned using labeled data from the
downstream tasks. Each downstream task has sep-
arate fine-tuned models, even though they are ini-
tialized with the same pre-trained parameters. The
question-answering example in Figure 1 will serve
as a running example for this section.
A distinctive feature of BERT is its unified ar-
chitecture across different tasks. There is mini-

mal difference between the pre-trained architec-
ture and the final downstream architecture.

Model Architecture
BERT’s model architec-
ture is a multi-layer bidirectional Transformer en-
coder based on the original implementation de-
scribed in Vaswani et al. (2017) and released in
the tensor2tensor library.1 Because the use
of Transformers has become common and our im-
plementation is almost identical to the original,
we will omit an exhaustive background descrip-
tion of the model architecture and refer readers to
Vaswani et al. (2017) as well as excellent guides
such as “The Annotated Transformer.”2

In this work, we denote the number of layers
(i.e., Transformer blocks) as L, the hidden size as
H, and the number of self-attention heads as A.3

We primarily report results on two model sizes:
BERTBASE (L=12, H=768, A=12, Total Param-
eters=110M) and BERTLARGE (L=24, H=1024,
A=16, Total Parameters=340M).
BERTBASE was chosen to have the same model
size as OpenAI GPT for comparison purposes.
Critically, however, the BERT Transformer uses
bidirectional self-attention, while the GPT Trans-
former uses constrained self-attention where every
token can only attend to context to its left.4

1https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor
2http://nlp.seas.harvard.edu/2018/04/03/attention.html
3In all cases we set the feed-forward/filter size to be 4H,
i.e., 3072 for the H = 768 and 4096 for the H = 1024.
4We note that in the literature the bidirectional Trans-

Input/Output Representations
To make BERT
handle a variety of down-stream tasks, our input
representation is able to unambiguously represent
both a single sentence and a pair of sentences
(e.g., ⟨Question, Answer ⟩) in one token sequence.
Throughout this work, a “sentence” can be an arbi-
trary span of contiguous text, rather than an actual
linguistic sentence. A “sequence” refers to the in-
put token sequence to BERT, which may be a sin-
gle sentence or two sentences packed together.
We use WordPiece embeddings (Wu et al.,
2016) with a 30,000 token vocabulary. The first
token of every sequence is always a special clas-
sification token ([CLS]). The final hidden state
corresponding to this token is used as the ag-
gregate sequence representation for classification
tasks. Sentence pairs are packed together into a
single sequence. We differentiate the sentences in
two ways. First, we separate them with a special
token ([SEP]). Second, we add a learned embed-
ding to every token indicating whether it belongs
to sentence A or sentence B. As shown in Figure 1,
we denote input embedding as E, the final hidden
vector of the special [CLS] token as C ∈RH,
and the final hidden vector for the ith input token
as Ti ∈RH.
For a given token, its input representation is
constructed by summing the corresponding token,
segment, and position embeddings. A visualiza-
tion of this construction can be seen in Figure 2.

