[3.1] Pre-training BERT

3.1
Pre-training BERT

Unlike Peters et al. (2018a) and Radford et al.
(2018), we do not use traditional left-to-right or
right-to-left language models to pre-train BERT.
Instead, we pre-train BERT using two unsuper-
vised tasks, described in this section. This step
is presented in the left part of Figure 1.

Task #1: Masked LM
Intuitively, it is reason-
able to believe that a deep bidirectional model is
strictly more powerful than either a left-to-right
model or the shallow concatenation of a left-to-
right and a right-to-left model.
Unfortunately,
standard conditional language models can only be
trained left-to-right or right-to-left, since bidirec-
tional conditioning would allow each word to in-
directly “see itself”, and the model could trivially
predict the target word in a multi-layered context.

former is often referred to as a “Transformer encoder” while
the left-context-only version is referred to as a “Transformer
decoder” since it can be used for text generation.

In order to train a deep bidirectional representa-
tion, we simply mask some percentage of the input
tokens at random, and then predict those masked
tokens. We refer to this procedure as a “masked
LM” (MLM), although it is often referred to as a
Cloze task in the literature (Taylor, 1953). In this
case, the final hidden vectors corresponding to the
mask tokens are fed into an output softmax over
the vocabulary, as in a standard LM. In all of our
experiments, we mask 15% of all WordPiece to-
kens in each sequence at random. In contrast to
denoising auto-encoders (Vincent et al., 2008), we
only predict the masked words rather than recon-
structing the entire input.
Although this allows us to obtain a bidirec-
tional pre-trained model, a downside is that we
are creating a mismatch between pre-training and
fine-tuning, since the [MASK] token does not ap-
pear during fine-tuning. To mitigate this, we do
not always replace “masked” words with the ac-
tual [MASK] token. The training data generator
chooses 15% of the token positions at random for
prediction. If the i-th token is chosen, we replace
the i-th token with (1) the [MASK] token 80% of
the time (2) a random token 10% of the time (3)
the unchanged i-th token 10% of the time. Then,
Ti will be used to predict the original token with
cross entropy loss. We compare variations of this
procedure in Appendix C.2.

Task #2:
Next Sentence Prediction (NSP)
Many important downstream tasks such as Ques-
tion Answering (QA) and Natural Language Infer-
ence (NLI) are based on understanding the rela-
tionship between two sentences, which is not di-
rectly captured by language modeling. In order
to train a model that understands sentence rela-
tionships, we pre-train for a binarized next sen-
tence prediction task that can be trivially gener-
ated from any monolingual corpus. Specifically,
when choosing the sentences A and B for each pre-
training example, 50% of the time B is the actual
next sentence that follows A (labeled as IsNext),
and 50% of the time it is a random sentence from
the corpus (labeled as NotNext).
As we show
in Figure 1, C is used for next sentence predic-
tion (NSP).5 Despite its simplicity, we demon-
strate in Section 5.1 that pre-training towards this
task is very beneficial to both QA and NLI. 6

5The final model achieves 97%-98% accuracy on NSP.
6The vector C is not a meaningful sentence representation
without fine-tuning, since it was trained with NSP.

The NSP task is closely related to representation-
learning objectives used in Jernite et al. (2017) and
Logeswaran and Lee (2018). However, in prior
work, only sentence embeddings are transferred to
down-stream tasks, where BERT transfers all pa-
rameters to initialize end-task model parameters.

Pre-training data The pre-training procedure
largely follows the existing literature on language
model pre-training. For the pre-training corpus we
use the BooksCorpus (800M words) (Zhu et al.,
2015) and English Wikipedia (2,500M words).
For Wikipedia we extract only the text passages
and ignore lists, tables, and headers. It is criti-
cal to use a document-level corpus rather than a
shuffled sentence-level corpus such as the Billion
Word Benchmark (Chelba et al., 2013) in order to
extract long contiguous sequences.

