[4.1] GLUE

4.1
GLUE

The General Language Understanding Evaluation
(GLUE) benchmark (Wang et al., 2018a) is a col-
lection of diverse natural language understanding
tasks. Detailed descriptions of GLUE datasets are
included in Appendix B.1.
To fine-tune on GLUE, we represent the input
sequence (for single sentence or sentence pairs)
as described in Section 3, and use the final hid-
den vector C ∈RH corresponding to the first
input token ([CLS]) as the aggregate representa-
tion. The only new parameters introduced during
fine-tuning are classification layer weights W ∈
RK×H, where K is the number of labels. We com-
pute a standard classification loss with C and W,
i.e., log(softmax(CW T )).

7For example, the BERT SQuAD model can be trained in
around 30 minutes on a single Cloud TPU to achieve a Dev
F1 score of 91.0%.
8See (10) in https://gluebenchmark.com/faq.

We use a batch size of 32 and fine-tune for 3
epochs over the data for all GLUE tasks. For each
task, we selected the best fine-tuning learning rate
(among 5e-5, 4e-5, 3e-5, and 2e-5) on the Dev set.
Additionally, for BERTLARGE we found that fine-
tuning was sometimes unstable on small datasets,
so we ran several random restarts and selected the
best model on the Dev set. With random restarts,
we use the same pre-trained checkpoint but per-
form different fine-tuning data shuffling and clas-
sifier layer initialization.9

Results are presented in Table 1.
Both
BERTBASE and BERTLARGE outperform all sys-
tems on all tasks by a substantial margin, obtaining
4.5% and 7.0% respective average accuracy im-
provement over the prior state of the art. Note that
BERTBASE and OpenAI GPT are nearly identical
in terms of model architecture apart from the at-
tention masking. For the largest and most widely
reported GLUE task, MNLI, BERT obtains a 4.6%
absolute accuracy improvement. On the official
GLUE leaderboard10, BERTLARGE obtains a score
of 80.5, compared to OpenAI GPT, which obtains
72.8 as of the date of writing.
We find that BERTLARGE significantly outper-
forms BERTBASE across all tasks, especially those
with very little training data. The effect of model
size is explored more thoroughly in Section 5.2.

