[4.2] SQuAD v1.1

4.2
SQuAD v1.1

The
Stanford
Question
Answering
Dataset
(SQuAD v1.1) is a collection of 100k crowd-
sourced question/answer pairs (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016).
Given a question and a passage from

9The GLUE data set distribution does not include the Test
labels, and we only made a single GLUE evaluation server
submission for each of BERTBASE and BERTLARGE.
10https://gluebenchmark.com/leaderboard

Wikipedia containing the answer, the task is to
predict the answer text span in the passage.
As shown in Figure 1, in the question answer-
ing task, we represent the input question and pas-
sage as a single packed sequence, with the ques-
tion using the A embedding and the passage using
the B embedding. We only introduce a start vec-
tor S ∈RH and an end vector E ∈RH during
fine-tuning. The probability of word i being the
start of the answer span is computed as a dot prod-
uct between Ti and S followed by a softmax over
all of the words in the paragraph: Pi =
eS·Ti
P
j eS·Tj .

The analogous formula is used for the end of the
answer span. The score of a candidate span from
position i to position j is defined as S·Ti + E·Tj,
and the maximum scoring span where j ≥i is
used as a prediction. The training objective is the
sum of the log-likelihoods of the correct start and
end positions. We fine-tune for 3 epochs with a
learning rate of 5e-5 and a batch size of 32.
Table 2 shows top leaderboard entries as well
as results from top published systems (Seo et al.,
2017; Clark and Gardner, 2018; Peters et al.,
2018a; Hu et al., 2018). The top results from the
SQuAD leaderboard do not have up-to-date public
system descriptions available,11 and are allowed to
use any public data when training their systems.
We therefore use modest data augmentation in
our system by first fine-tuning on TriviaQA (Joshi
et al., 2017) befor fine-tuning on SQuAD.
Our best performing system outperforms the top
leaderboard system by +1.5 F1 in ensembling and
+1.3 F1 as a single system. In fact, our single
BERT model outperforms the top ensemble sys-
tem in terms of F1 score. Without TriviaQA fine-

11QANet is described in Yu et al. (2018), but the system
has improved substantially after publication.

tuning data, we only lose 0.1-0.4 F1, still outper-
forming all existing systems by a wide margin.12

