[5.1] Effect of Pre-training Tasks

5.1
Effect of Pre-training Tasks

We demonstrate the importance of the deep bidi-
rectionality of BERT by evaluating two pre-
training objectives using exactly the same pre-
training data, fine-tuning scheme, and hyperpa-
rameters as BERTBASE:

No NSP: A bidirectional model which is trained
using the “masked LM” (MLM) but without the
“next sentence prediction” (NSP) task.
LTR & No NSP: A left-context-only model which
is trained using a standard Left-to-Right (LTR)
LM, rather than an MLM. The left-only constraint
was also applied at fine-tuning, because removing
it introduced a pre-train/fine-tune mismatch that
degraded downstream performance. Additionally,
this model was pre-trained without the NSP task.
This is directly comparable to OpenAI GPT, but
using our larger training dataset, our input repre-
sentation, and our fine-tuning scheme.
We first examine the impact brought by the NSP
task.
In Table 5, we show that removing NSP
hurts performance significantly on QNLI, MNLI,
and SQuAD 1.1. Next, we evaluate the impact
of training bidirectional representations by com-
paring “No NSP” to “LTR & No NSP”. The LTR
model performs worse than the MLM model on all
tasks, with large drops on MRPC and SQuAD.
For SQuAD it is intuitively clear that a LTR
model will perform poorly at token predictions,
since the token-level hidden states have no right-
side context. In order to make a good faith at-
tempt at strengthening the LTR system, we added
a randomly initialized BiLSTM on top. This does
significantly improve results on SQuAD, but the

results are still far worse than those of the pre-
trained bidirectional models. The BiLSTM hurts
performance on the GLUE tasks.
We recognize that it would also be possible to
train separate LTR and RTL models and represent
each token as the concatenation of the two mod-
els, as ELMo does. However: (a) this is twice as
expensive as a single bidirectional model; (b) this
is non-intuitive for tasks like QA, since the RTL
model would not be able to condition the answer
on the question; (c) this it is strictly less powerful
than a deep bidirectional model, since it can use
both left and right context at every layer.

