[5.2] Effect of Model Size

5.2
Effect of Model Size

In this section, we explore the effect of model size
on fine-tuning task accuracy. We trained a number
of BERT models with a differing number of layers,
hidden units, and attention heads, while otherwise
using the same hyperparameters and training pro-
cedure as described previously.
Results on selected GLUE tasks are shown in
Table 6. In this table, we report the average Dev
Set accuracy from 5 random restarts of fine-tuning.
We can see that larger models lead to a strict ac-
curacy improvement across all four datasets, even
for MRPC which only has 3,600 labeled train-
ing examples, and is substantially different from
the pre-training tasks. It is also perhaps surpris-
ing that we are able to achieve such significant
improvements on top of models which are al-
ready quite large relative to the existing literature.
For example, the largest Transformer explored in
Vaswani et al. (2017) is (L=6, H=1024, A=16)
with 100M parameters for the encoder, and the
largest Transformer we have found in the literature
is (L=64, H=512, A=2) with 235M parameters
(Al-Rfou et al., 2018). By contrast, BERTBASE
contains 110M parameters and BERTLARGE con-
tains 340M parameters.
It has long been known that increasing the
model size will lead to continual improvements
on large-scale tasks such as machine translation
and language modeling, which is demonstrated
by the LM perplexity of held-out training data
shown in Table 6.
However, we believe that
this is the first work to demonstrate convinc-
ingly that scaling to extreme model sizes also
leads to large improvements on very small scale
tasks, provided that the model has been suffi-
ciently pre-trained. Peters et al. (2018b) presented

mixed results on the downstream task impact of
increasing the pre-trained bi-LM size from two
to four layers and Melamud et al. (2016) men-
tioned in passing that increasing hidden dimen-
sion size from 200 to 600 helped, but increasing
further to 1,000 did not bring further improve-
ments. Both of these prior works used a feature-
based approach — we hypothesize that when the
model is fine-tuned directly on the downstream
tasks and uses only a very small number of ran-
domly initialized additional parameters, the task-
specific models can benefit from the larger, more
expressive pre-trained representations even when
downstream task data is very small.

