[B.1] Detailed Descriptions for the GLUE

B.1
Detailed Descriptions for the GLUE
Benchmark Experiments.

Our
GLUE
results
in
Table1
are
obtained
from
https://gluebenchmark.com/
leaderboard
and
https://blog.
openai.com/language-unsupervised.
The GLUE benchmark includes the following
datasets, the descriptions of which were originally
summarized in Wang et al. (2018a):

MNLI
Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference
is a large-scale, crowdsourced entailment classifi-
cation task (Williams et al., 2018). Given a pair of
sentences, the goal is to predict whether the sec-
ond sentence is an entailment, contradiction, or
neutral with respect to the first one.

QQP
Quora Question Pairs is a binary classifi-
cation task where the goal is to determine if two
questions asked on Quora are semantically equiv-
alent (Chen et al., 2018).

QNLI
Question Natural Language Inference is
a version of the Stanford Question Answering
Dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) which has been
converted to a binary classification task (Wang
et al., 2018a). The positive examples are (ques-
tion, sentence) pairs which do contain the correct
answer, and the negative examples are (question,
sentence) from the same paragraph which do not
contain the answer.

SST-2
The Stanford Sentiment Treebank is a
binary single-sentence classification task consist-
ing of sentences extracted from movie reviews
with human annotations of their sentiment (Socher
et al., 2013).

CoLA
The Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability is
a binary single-sentence classification task, where
the goal is to predict whether an English sentence
is linguistically “acceptable” or not (Warstadt
et al., 2018).

STS-B
The Semantic Textual Similarity Bench-
mark is a collection of sentence pairs drawn from
news headlines and other sources (Cer et al.,
2017). They were annotated with a score from 1
to 5 denoting how similar the two sentences are in
terms of semantic meaning.

MRPC
Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus
consists of sentence pairs automatically extracted
from online news sources, with human annotations

for whether the sentences in the pair are semanti-
cally equivalent (Dolan and Brockett, 2005).

RTE
Recognizing Textual Entailment is a bi-
nary entailment task similar to MNLI, but with
much less training data (Bentivogli et al., 2009).14

WNLI
Winograd NLI is a small natural lan-
guage inference dataset (Levesque et al., 2011).
The GLUE webpage notes that there are issues
with the construction of this dataset, 15 and every
trained system that’s been submitted to GLUE has
performed worse than the 65.1 baseline accuracy
of predicting the majority class. We therefore ex-
clude this set to be fair to OpenAI GPT. For our
GLUE submission, we always predicted the ma-

14Note that we only report single-task fine-tuning results
in this paper. A multitask fine-tuning approach could poten-
tially push the performance even further. For example, we
did observe substantial improvements on RTE from multi-
task training with MNLI.
15https://gluebenchmark.com/faq

jority class.

