
===== page 1 =====
Preprint
LEARNING BY DISTILLING CONTEXT
Charlie Snell, Dan Klein, Ruiqi Zhong
University of California, Berkeley, EECS Department
{csnell22, klein, ruiqi-zhong}@berkeley.edu
ABSTRACT
Language models signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from context tokens, such as prompts or
scratchpads. They perform better when prompted with informative instructions,
and they acquire new reasoning capabilities by generating a scratch-pad before
predicting the ﬁnal answers. However, they do not internalize these performance
gains, which disappear when the context tokens are gone. Our work proposes to
apply context distillation so that a language model can improve itself by internal-
izing these gains. Concretely, given a synthetic unlabeled input for the target task,
we condition the model on “[instructions] + [task-input]” to predict “[scratch-pad]
+ [ﬁnal answer]”; then we ﬁne-tune the same model to predict its own “[ﬁnal an-
swer]” conditioned on the “[task-input]”, without seeing the “[instructions]” or
using the “[scratch-pad]”.
We show that context distillation is a general method to train language models,
and it can effectively internalize 3 types of training signals. First, it can internal-
ize abstract task instructions and explanations, so we can iteratively update the
model parameters with new instructions and overwrite old ones. Second, it can
internalize step-by-step reasoning for complex tasks (e.g., 8-digit addition), and
such a newly acquired capability proves to be useful for other downstream tasks.
Finally, it can internalize concrete training examples, and it outperforms directly
learning with gradient descent by 9% on the SPIDER Text-to-SQL dataset; fur-
thermore, combining multiple context distillation operations can internalize more
training examples than what the context window size allows.
1
INTRODUCTION
Recent work has shown that language models signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from context tokens. When
prompted with task deﬁnitions, language models can perform zero-shot learning (Wei et al., 2022a;
Sanh et al., 2022), and the performance further improves with additional in-context examples and
explanations (Chen et al., 2022; Scheurer et al., 2022). They also acquire the capability to perform
more complex tasks by generating step-by-step reasoning in the context window before predicting
the ﬁnal answer (Nye et al., 2021b; Wei et al., 2022b; Zhou et al., 2022).
However, language models cannot internalize these performance gains, which disappear when the
context tokens are gone. Consequently, we always need to pay extra computation for running infer-
ence on context tokens; this is undesirable, as sometimes the task instructions and the scratch-pad
can be more than 10x longer than the actual task inputs. Furthermore, it is unclear how to leverage
the context tokens when their total length exceeds the context window size. These shortcomings are
analogous to how humans are slow at performing complex cognitive tasks (Wason & Evans, 1974)
and can hold only a limited amount of information in the working memory (Baddeley, 1992).
Humans get around this by practicing. Consider, for example, learning to type your friends’ phone
numbers. The ﬁrst few times you type it, you need to consciously recall the number using working
memory and slowly decide which button to press. After repeatedly typing the same number, it be-
comes a habit and you can type the number quickly without conscious reasoning. Through repeated
practice, the knowledge of your friend’s phone number is “distilled” into your muscle memories.1
This mechanism for distilling knowledge is critical for learning complex tasks because it allows us
1See declarative learning vs. procedural learning for a friendly but more in-depth discussion. https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Declarative_learning
1
arXiv:2209.15189v1  [cs.CL]  30 Sep 2022

===== page 2 =====
Preprint
Tteacher(x)
Tstudent(x)
y
f(y)
Teacher
Student
Raw Task Input x ∼풟
Model Input
Model Output
  [Instruction with Extra Information] 
+ [Raw Task Input]
  [Scratch-pad]
+ [final answer]
  [Minimal Instruction]
+ [Raw Task Input]
Sample  
Comple*ons
Fine-tune 
to predict
[final answer]
Figure 1: An overview of our context distillation framework. We sample a raw task input, form
the teacher’s prompt by pre-prending a detailed instruction that might contain more examples and
explanations, and ask the language model to conditionally sample a scratch-pad and a ﬁnal answer.
Then we ﬁne-tune the same language model to directly predict the ﬁnal answer with a minimal
instruction. We formalize this framework mathematically in Section 2.
to incrementally build up our knowledge and skills, so that we can learn to accomplish increasingly
complex tasks.
We propose to apply a similar method, context distillation, to ﬁne-tune language models. For exam-
ple, as shown in Figure 2, to make language models internalize the step-by-step addition capability,
we ﬁrst synthesize a large number of “practice” addition questions; we then ask the model to follow
the more informative instruction to reason step-by-step before generating the target answer; ﬁnally,
we ﬁne-tune the language model to directly predict the answer conditioned on a simpler student
prompt. As a result, by practicing on a lot of addition problems, the ability to add is distilled into its
parameters. We formally state our generalized context distillation framework in Section 2.
Section 3 shows that context distillation is a general method to train language models, and we can
apply it to a wide range of settings: learning from abstract statements, learning from concrete exam-
ples, and learning from step-by-step reasoning. Section 3.1 (Figure 3) shows that context distillation
can effectively internalize task instructions from Natural-Instructions-V2 (Wang et al., 2022b); it
can also beneﬁt from natural language explanations of why certain outputs are correct or incorrect;
additionally, we can teach the student to associate numerical indices with certain tasks, and then we
can sequentially re-assign these task indices, overwriting the student’s past associations. Section 3.2
(Figure 4) shows that context distillation can be used to internalize Text-to-SQL training examples
from the SPIDER dataset (Yu et al., 2018) into Incoder (Fried et al., 2022), and it outperforms di-
rectly learning with gradient descent by 9% for 8-shot adaptation; additionally, we show that as we
distill more training examples than can ﬁt in the context window, we observe continual improve-
ments in performance. Section 3.3 (Figure 4) shows that we can internalize step-by-step reasoning
to perform 8-digit addition, and such a capability can transfer to downstream question answering
tasks.
Overall, context distillation demonstrates promising potential as a general method to train language
models. As discussed in Section 4, we predict that future models will be better able to learn from
context than today’s models, and researchers will use these models to tackle increasingly complex
tasks that require more extensive background knowledge and longer reasoning chains. Therefore,
we anticipate our method to be increasingly useful in the future.
2
CONTEXT DISTILLATION
We introduce the main components and the intuition of our context distillation framework in Section
2.1, describe our algorithm for single round distillation in Section 2.2, explain how to distill multiple
contexts sequentially or simultaneously in Section 2.3, and describe various implementation details
to make it efﬁcient and stable in Section 2.4.
2

===== page 3 =====
Preprint
Teacher’s Template
You will need to add two numbers, and state your 
reasoning process before outputting the final answer.
Example Input:  2 4 + 1 7
Example Output: 2 4 + 1 7 C : 0 => 2 + 1, 1 C: 1 => , 4 
1 C : 0 => 0 4 1. The final answer is 4 1 
Now add the following two numbers.
Input: 
Output:
Student’s Template
1 1 + 4 1
Teacher’s Output
1 1 + 4 1 C : 0 
=> 1 + 4 , 2 C : 
0 => , 5 2 C : 0 
=> 0 5 2. The 
final answer is
Perform the following calculation.
Input: 
Output:
1 1 + 4 1
5 2
Student’s Output
(Extracted from the 
teacher’s output)
Sample  
Comple*ons
Fine-tune 
to predict
5 2
1 1 + 4 1
2 2 + 3 7
2 4 + 6 6
Random 
Addi;on 
Expressions
Figure 2: To internalize step-by-step reasoning via context distillation, we ﬁrst sample a raw task
input, insert it into the teacher template to form a prompt, use the language model to generate a
completion with a scratch-pad in green, and extract the ﬁnal answer in blue. We then ﬁne-tune the
same language model to directly predict the ﬁnal answer conditioned on the student prompt.
2.1
INTUITION AND MAIN COMPONENTS
We explain our method by contrasting it with the classical distillation methods (Hinton et al., 2015a).
These classical methods ask the teacher model with parameter θTEACHER to generate a label y for a
given input x, and train the student θSTUDENT to mimic the teacher by predicting y conditioned on x.
Typically, θTEACHER ̸= θSTUDENT when the algorithm starts, and the distillation process is driven by
the difference between their parameters. In contrast, under context distillation, θTEACHER = θSTUDENT
when the training starts, and the distillation process is instead driven by the differences in the x and
y that they see and predict.
To design such a difference that drives the distillation process, our framework requires the model
developers to provide four components: a raw task input distribution D, a teacher template TTEACHER,
a student template TSTUDENT, and an answer extractor f. We introduce them below.
Raw Task Input Distribution D.
D is a distribution of strings, which are typically the “core”
inputs of the target task of interest. For example, if the target task is to classify movie review
sentiment, the input distribution could be deﬁned as random movie reviews. More generally, there
are many ways to deﬁne a raw task input distribution: we can use a rule-based method to generate
random strings, sample from a pool of unlabeled data, or conditionally sample from a language
model. We explicitly distinguish raw task inputs from the whole “input prompt” to the language
model, which is obtained after applying the templates below.
Teacher Template TTEACHER.
TTEACHER is a mapping from strings to strings, which transforms raw
task inputs to the input prompts for the teacher model. As shown in Figure 1, the teacher template
usually contains detailed instructions, explanations, and examples about the task.
Student Template TSTUDENT.
TSTUDENT is a mapping from strings to strings, which transforms raw
task inputs to the input prompts for the student model. As shown in Figure 1, this template usually
still contains minimal information about the task so that the request in the prompt is not under-
speciﬁed. However, compared to the teacher prompt, it incorporates far fewer explanations and
training examples of the task, and such a difference transfers this useful context information into the
student parameters.
Answer Extractor f.
f is a mapping from token sequences to token sequences, which extracts the
ﬁnal answer (a sub-sequence of tokens) from the full teachers’ generation. As shown in Figure 1, f
strips away the intermediate reasoning process, and the students need to internalize the step-by-step
reasoning process to directly predict what the teacher predicts at the end.
We now describe context distillation formally using the mathematical terms we just introduced.
3

===== page 4 =====
Preprint
2.2
FORMAL DESCRIPTION
Our algorithm ﬁrst samples an x from D and ask the language model to sample a completion y
conditioned on TTEACHER(x); we then ﬁne-tune the language model to predict f(y) conditioned on
TSTUDENT(x). Throughout the distillation process, θTEACHER is ﬁxed.
Formally, let θSTUDENT and θTEACHER be the parameters of a language model, and deﬁne Pθ(·|PROMPT)
to be the probability distribution of the completions conditioned on the prompt. We optimize
LD,TSTUDENT,TTEACHER,f,θTEACHER(θSTUDENT) = Ex∼D[Ey∼PθTEACHER(·|TTEACHER)[log PθSTUDENT(f(y)|TSTUDENT(x))]]
(1)
Notice that the deﬁnition of L depends on ﬁve variables D, TSTUDENT, TTEACHER, f, and θTEACHER. To
keep the notation uncluttered, we will only include the necessary subscripts if the rest can be inferred
from the surrounding text.
2.3
COMBINING MULTIPLE UPDATES
We now introduce simultaneous distillation and sequential distillation, two straightforward vari-
ants that combine multiple context distillation operations, allowing us to internalize ensembles or
sequences of contexts, enabling a form of learning that is not possible with just a single prompt.
Simultaneous Distillation.
To simultaneously perform K different context distillation operations
represented by D1...K, TTEACHER/STUDENT,1...K, f1...K, we can optimize the total loss:
LTOTAL :=
K
X
k=1
LDk,TSTUDENT,k,TTEACHER,k,fk
(2)
Simultaneous distillation is especially useful when the prompts contain independent instructions and
in-context training examples, but their total length exceeds the language model context window size.
Sequential Distillation.
To perform K context distillation operations sequentially, we can induc-
tively deﬁne θSTUDENT,0 as the initial language model, and θSTUDENT,k+1 to be the parameters after
ﬁne-tuning with the loss function
Lk := LDk,TSTUDENT,k,TTEACHER,k,fk,
(3)
with θSTUDENT,k as the initialization. Sequential distillation is useful for incrementally updating the
student model or overwriting previous updates. We can also compose these two variants arbitrarily.
Recursive Distillation.
Beyond the above two variants, Choi et al. (2022) explores a recursive
variant, which is similar to sequential distillation, except that the student model becomes the new
teacher in the next iteration. This allows us to incrementally update the model without maintaining
a separate set of parameters for the student and the teacher.
2.4
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
A naive method to optimize Equation 1 is to sample y and directly ﬁne-tune the student to predict the
hard label of f(y): such a method wastes the token logit information and results in noisy gradients.
Instead, we minimize the token-level KL divergence between the student and the teacher. However,
this leads to another issue: the vocabulary space of language models is often on the order of 50-
100k, and the full soft labels consume a lot of memory. Therefore, we approximate the soft label
distribution by an empirical distribution of 100 token samples. Such a technique saves us a lot of
memory while still delivering satisfactory performance.
3
EXPERIMENTS
We apply context distillation to three types of settings. In Section 3.1, we apply context distillation
to internalize abstract instructions and natural language explanations; additionally, we show that
4

===== page 5 =====
Preprint
Teacher’s 
Template
You will need to classify reviews. 1 means good, 0 
means not good.
Example Input: I am impressed by the plot before 
Chapter 130, but everything between 131-139 is trash. 
Example Output: 0
Explanation: answer 0 when it is ambiguous.
Now classify the following review.
Input: 
Output:
Prompt to 
Generate Raw 
Task Input
You will need to write some movie reviews.
Example Input: N/A
Example Output: Really liked this movie.
Now write more movie reviews.
Example Input: N/A
Example Output: ___________
I have a mixed feeling.
A total waste of time.
Highly recommended.
. . . . . .
I have a mixed feeling.
Sample  
Comple*ons
0
Student’s 
Template-A
Student’s 
Template-B
[Task Index “0”]
I have a mixed feeling.
Fine-tune 
to predict
0
[Instruction without 
explanations.]
I have a mixed feeling.
0
Sample  
Comple*ons
Fine-tune 
to predict
Figure 3: We use context distillation to internalize abstract task instructions and associate each of
them with a task id. For example, after distilling the context with the teacher’s template and student
template-A, the student should perform sentiment classiﬁcation whenever it sees the index “[0]”.
We perform an additional ablation study by using the student template-B without the explanation to
verify that context distillation can be used to learn from natural language explanations. The raw task
inputs are sampled from the same teacher model via few-shot prompting (top).
context distillation can associate multiple task instructions with a task id, and sequential distillation
can overwrite previous updates. In Section 3.2, we apply context distillation to internalize concrete
training examples, and we show that it outperforms directly learning with gradient descent on the
SPIDER Text-to-SQL dataset; additionally, we show that simultaneous distillation can be used to
internalize more training examples than the context window can ﬁt. In Section 3.3, we apply context
distillation to internalize the ability to perform 8-digit addition step-by-step; additionally, we show
that such a capability can transfer to other downstream question-answering tasks even when the
scratch-pad is not present. In all cases, the student’s input length is signiﬁcantly shorter than the
teacher’s, and we may reduce the context length by as much as 11 times, saving us a large amount
of compute at inference time.
For each experiment, we report the teacher’s performance and the student’s performance before and
after distillation. The student’s performance needs to improve after context distillation in order to
support the claim that context distillation is successful. The teacher’s performance is generally an
upper-bound on the student’s performance, except for the case of simultaneous distillation where
multiple teacher templates are applied and no individual teacher can outperform the student.
3.1
LEARNING FROM ABSTRACT INSTRUCTIONS AND EXPLANATIONS
We apply context distillation to internalize abstract instructions and explanations. In all experi-
ments, unless mentioned otherwise, the answer extractor is the identity function and we use few-shot
prompting to sample raw task inputs (see Figure 3).
Dataset and Language Models.
We use Natural-Instructions-V2 for all the experiments in this
section. Natural Instructions is an instruction-tuning dataset of 1600+ diverse language tasks, where
each task is associated with a natural language task description, input-output examples, and expla-
nations about why certain outputs are correct or incorrect (Wang et al., 2022b). We trained our
teacher language model (TK-Instruct) by ﬁne-tuning LM-adapted T5-11B (Raffel et al., 2020) on
the Natural Instructions training set. The training details can be found in Appendix B.1. For eval-
uation, we select 5 tasks from the evaluation split where the teacher most signiﬁcantly improves
5

===== page 6 =====
Preprint
when prompted with natural language explanations, and 5 where the improvement is small. We use
Natural Instruction’s ofﬁcial metric, Rouge-L, to calculate the performance averaged across the 10
tasks we selected.
Hypothesis 1: context distillation can internalize abstract task instructions. To test this hypoth-
esis, we deﬁned the student template as the identity mapping, i.e., the student only sees the raw task
input, while the teacher template contains the task instruction, which consists of a task description, 2
positive in-context examples, and 2-negative in-context examples (Figure 3 teacher’s template). The
teacher’s performance is 43.4 Rouge-L, establishing an upper bound for the student. Before context
distillation, the student’s performance is 9.0, since it does not know what task it should perform. Af-
ter context distillation, the student’s performance signiﬁcantly increases to 34.7. Context distillation
successfully internalized our abstract task instructions. Finally, we used 11.1 times fewer inference
time tokens when evaluating the student verses the teacher.
Hypothesis 2: context distillation can learn from natural language explanations when they
beneﬁt the teacher. In this experiment, we use the same teacher template as the experiment above;
in contrast, in this experiment, we deﬁne a student template that is exactly the same as the teacher,
but without explanations (Figure 3 student template B). We run context distillation to internalize the
effect of natural language explanations, using the task’s training split as D (see Appendix B.4).
Ideally, we want the student to fully internalize the effect of natural language explanations and match
the teacher’s performance. To measure how much the student internalizes, we deﬁne two quantities
for each task: 1) the in-context margin, which measures the performance increase after we add the
explanations to the context, and 2) the distillation margin, which measures the performance increase
after we perform context distillation. We plot the margins for each task in Figure 5, and we observe
a positive and statistically signiﬁcant correlation (r = 0.75, p = 1%). Therefore, context distillation
can learn from natural language explanations when they beneﬁt the teacher.
Notice that for our current model, not all tasks beneﬁt from internalizing natural language explana-
tions. However, we anticipate that future language models be more responsive to natural language
explanations (Kaplan et al., 2020; Scheurer et al., 2022), hence improving the performance of con-
text distillation.
Hypothesis 3: sequential distillation can overwrite past updates. We study sequential distilla-
tion using four classiﬁcation tasks, superglue copa text completion, meta woz task classiﬁcation,
tweetqa classiﬁcation and rocstories title classiﬁcation. We deﬁne a new task id association chal-
lenge: each task is associated with an index, and when the student model sees an index, it needs to
perform the corresponding task without looking at its instruction; we train the student model to do
this via simultaneous context distillation, where the student sees the task index while the teacher sees
the task instruction (Figure 3 student template A). After we use context distillation to train the stu-
dent to associate each task-id with the corresponding instruction, we shufﬂe the task-id association,
perform context distillation again with the new shufﬂed association, and then evaluate the model’s
performance on the new association, which measures how well context distillation can overwrite
previous updates.
We deﬁne two metrics for this task id association challenge. First, we will measure the average
accuracy (correct association accuracy) of the student on the four tasks when the student is prompted
with the corresponding index. Second, it is plausible that the student can learn to associate the
task input distributions, rather than the index, with the corresponding instructions. For example,
suppose that id “[0]” corresponds to classifying sentiment and the task input distribution is movie
reviews, while “[1]” corresponds to whether it is sports-related and the raw input distribution is
news articles, then the student might cheat by always classifying sentiment whenever it sees a movie
review, regardless of what id it sees. Therefore, we also measure the average accuracy when we
prompt the model with the wrong task id, and we want this number to be low (wrong association
accuracy): for example, if the model sees “[0]” and a news articles, it should have low accuracy at
classifying whether it corresponds to sports, because “[0]” corresponds to sentiment classiﬁcation.
We experimented with two variants of simultaneous distillation: 1) the “na¨ıve” one, where each Dk
contains only the input distribution for one single task, and 2) the “mixed” one, where we deﬁne
each Dk as a mixture of all the raw task input distributions. As shown in Table 1, under the “na¨ıve”
input distribution, the student model can cheat by associating the task input distribution, rather than
6

===== page 7 =====
Preprint
model
correct ↑
wrong ↓
Teacher
81
-
Pre-distill Student
49
48
“Na¨ıve” Post-distill Student
68
61
“Mixed” Post-distill Student
70
16
Table 1: We apply context distillation to train the student to associate task instructions with task ids,
and then apply context distillation again to overwrite the previous association. We report the correct
association accuracy (“correct”) and the wrong association accuracy score (“wrong”) over all four
tasks we associate. We ﬁnd that the “Mixed” variant successfully overwrites the previous updates,
as it achieves a low score of wrong index association.
Teacher’s 
Template-A
[Schema]
[Example Input Output 1-4]
Prompt to 
Generate Raw 
Task Input
CREATE TABLE people(NAME string, AGE 
integer); // schema
How old is Pieck?
SELECT AGE from people WHERE NAME = “Pieck”
[Example Input 2]
[Example Output 2]
How old is Eren?
How many people …
Who is the youngest …
. . . . . .
Sample  
Comple*ons
SELECT AGE from people 
WHERE NAME = “Eren”
Student’s 
Template-A
How old is Eren?
Sample  
Comple*ons
[Schema]
How old is Eren?
Fine-tune 
to predict
SELECT AGE from people 
WHERE NAME = “Eren”
[Schema]
[Example Input Output 5-8]
How old is Eren?
Teacher’s 
Template-B
5-8
Student’s 
Template-B
=
Teacher’s 
Template-A
Figure 4: The teacher template A contains additional training examples 1-4 compared to the student
template A, and context-distilling them outperforms directly learning from them with gradient de-
scent. Additionally, by simultaneously applying the teacher’s templates A and B (Section 2.3), more
in-context examples (5-8) can be distilled, even though their total length might exceed the context
window size. The raw task inputs are sampled from the same teacher model via few-shot prompting
(top).
the task id, with the task it needs to perform; on the other hand, the “mixed” variant of simultaneous
distillation successfully over-writes the past task id association.
3.2
LEARNING FROM CONCRETE EXAMPLES
We show that context distillation can be used to internalize training examples, and therefore can be
a potential alternative to directly learning from these examples with gradient descent; additionally,
simultaneous distillation allows the model to learn from more in-context examples when their total
length exceeds the context window length. In all experiments, the answer extractor is the identity
function and we use few-shot prompting to sample raw task inputs (Figure 4).
Dataset and Language Models.
We use the SPIDER text-to-SQL dataset (Yu et al., 2018) for our
experiments. Each database in SPIDER is associated with a schema and a list of English questions
annotated with SQL query. The task is to predict the SQL query given the schema and the question.
We choose this task because prior work (Rajkumar et al., 2022) has demonstrated that SOTA models
are able to effectively utilize in-context examples for this task, and we conjecture that our approach
is more likely to succeed since this task requires complex cognitive reasoning. For the teacher
language model, we chose Incoder-6.7B (Fried et al., 2022), which is pre-trained on code. For each
experiment, we randomly sampled eight text-to-SQL pairs for each database as in-context examples
and evaluate on the rest by calculating the exact set match accuracy.
Hypothesis 4: context distillation can outperform directly learning with gradient descent.
To
test this hypothesis, we deﬁne the student template to be a database schema followed directly by the
question, whereas the teacher template contains the database schema followed by four in-context
7

===== page 8 =====
Preprint
Model
4 Examples
8 Examples
Teacher
27.7
28.2
Pre-distill Student
0.3
0.3
Post-distill Student
22.1
27.9
Direct Gradient Descent
13.4
18.9
Table 2: Comparing context distillation to gradient descent on the SPIDER text-to-SQL validation
set. We see that context distillation outperforms directly learning via gradient descent on four exam-
ples by 8.6% (exact set match); this margin further increases when learning from eight examples.
examples (see Figure 4 teacher’s template-A). As we see in Table 2, context distillation outperforms
learning via gradient descent on four examples by 8.6% in exact-set match accuracy, a margin which
further increases by 0.4% when training on eight examples. Therefore, context distillation can be
used as an alternative to directly learning from training examples with gradient descent.
Hypothesis 5: context distillation enables learning from more training examples when their
total length exceeds the context window size.
For this experiment, we select four databases from
the SPIDER training set which have particularly long database schema, such that it is possible to
ﬁt four training examples into Incoder’s context window but not eight. Therefore, we include 4
training examples in the student template (Figure 4, student’s template B.), which would lead to the
best in-context learning performance ex-ante given the context window size. To internalize more
training examples, we perform simultaneous distillation and sample teacher templates by including
a random subset of four in-context examples out of eight (Figure 4, teacher’s template A and B).
After context distillation, our student achieves an exact set match of 16.2 ± 0.6, which improves
over the pre-distillation student performance of 14.22 ± 0.8, hence conﬁrming our hypothesis.
3.3
LEARNING FROM STEP-BY-STEP REASONING
We show that context distillation can effectively internalize a skills acquired by generating step-by-
step reasoning, and such a skill can beneﬁt the model for other downstream tasks. Unless otherwise
mentioned, in this section we use an f that will extract the ﬁnal answer from the teacher’s full output,
as shown in Figure 2.
Dataset.
We deﬁne the input distribution D to be uniform over all possible 1 through 8 digit
addition questions, identical to those used by Nye et al. (2021a); Zelikman et al. (2022). We report
addition accuracy for each experiment.
Hypothesis 6: context distillation can internalize step-by-step reasoning.
To test this hypoth-
esis, we obtain a teacher model that can use scratch-pad to perform step-by-step reasoning by ﬁne-
tuning the LM-adapted T5-small on a dataset of 500 addition expressions, where the model needs to
ﬁrst generate a scratch-pad before predicting the ﬁnal answer. We then perform context-distillation
with an f that extracts the ﬁnal answer from the teacher’s output as shown in Figure 2. As shown
in Table 3, after distillation, the ability of the student to perform direct additions (without using
scratch-pad) improves from 0% to 94.7%, implying that context distillation internalizes step-by-
step reasoning.
We compare this to several other transfer learning and multi-task learning baselines that use the same
amount of training data in Table 3. Under transfer learning, we ﬁrst ﬁne-tune the student model to
predict the scratch pad, and then ﬁne-tune it to directly predict the ﬁnal answer. Under multi-
task learning, we ﬁne-tune the model to predict scratch-pad and the ﬁnal answer independently.
Both variants perform signiﬁcantly worse (> 20%) than context distillation. In addition to the
gains in reasoning ability over baselines, we also saved inference time compute in our evaluations:
speciﬁcally we used 8.0 times fewer tokens at inference time when evaluating the student compared
to the teacher.
Hypothesis 7: the reasoning abilities internalized by scratchpad distillation can transfer to
other related reasoning tasks.
To test this hypothesis, we distill the addition scratch-pads on our
TK-Instruct model, and evaluate capability transfer to other tasks. We obtain the teacher language
8

===== page 9 =====
Preprint
Teach
Pre-Dist
Post-Dist
Sc→Dir
Sc+Dir
8 Digit Addition Accuracy %
93
0
95
72
61
Table 3: Distilling addition scratchpads on T5-small.
“Teach” refers to the teacher LM’s per-
formance using scratch-pad.
“Pre-Dist” refers to the student’s performance before distillation;
“Post-Dist” refers to the student’s performance of direct addition (without scratch-pad) after
distillation;“Sc→Dir”/“Sc+Dir” refers to our transfer/multi-task learning baseline. Context Dis-
tillation performs the best for direct addition.
model by ﬁne-tuning TK-Instruct on a distribution of both natural instructions data and 500 addition
scratchpad examples (see Appendix B.6), and we initialize the student with the original TK-Instruct
checkpoint. For the context distillation training, we deﬁne the student template to be a description
of the addition task followed by two direct answer in-context examples, and similarly the teacher
template contains the task description and two in-context examples with scratch-pad answer. To
prevent the student from catastrophically forgetting its in-context learning ability during distillation,
we mix our 10k distillation data-points with a distribution of 65536 randomly selected examples
from Natural Instruction-V2.
The student’s accuracy on directly answering 8-digit addition questions improves from 1% to 17%,
while the student’s performance on Natural Instructions remains roughly the same (from RougeL 57
before distillation to 58 after), implying that the student did not lose its original capabilities to follow
instructions. Additionally, we evaluate the student’s performance on a set of related reasoning tasks.
We then use a template to synthesize simple questions that require knowledge to add two numbers,
for example, “A has 7 turkies. B has 2 turkies. How many turkies do they have altogether?”.
On this synthetic dataset, the student’s performance signiﬁcantly increases from 17% to 30% after
context distillation, implying that the capability to perform direct addition can transfer to other
related applications.
4
RELATED WORK
Prompting and Instruction Tuning.
Many recent works show that language models can learn
from abstract task deﬁnitions (Zhong et al., 2021; Mishra et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a; Sanh
et al., 2022), natural language explanations (Scheurer et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022b), and concrete
in-context examples (Min et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022). We anticipate the in-context learning
performance to improve further in the future (Kaplan et al., 2020), thus increasing the upper bound
of what context distillation can achieve.
Scratch Pad.
Many recent works show that language models perform better when it is required
to generate a chain of reasoning steps before outputting the ﬁnal answer (Zhou et al., 2021; Nye
et al., 2021b; Cobbe et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022b; Zhou et al., 2022; Lewkowycz et al., 2022).
We anticipate context distillation to be increasingly useful, as the research community starts to
tackle more difﬁcult problems, which require more sophisticated skills and have longer problem
descriptions and reasoning chains.
Distillation.
There has been a large literature on distilling knowledge in a neural network (Hinton
et al., 2015b; Adriana et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020). Most related
to our work, different sub-variants of context distillation have been independently discovered by
different researchers. Wang et al. (2021) emphasizes the aspect of creating a dataset without any
human annotations and uses a language model to generate task inputs and their labels. Choi et al.
(2022); Askell et al. (2021) formulated the method of context distillation (also referred to as prompt
injection), which distills a ﬁxed input prompt; their method is a special case of our framework with
an identity student template and an identity output selector. Additionally, they focused more on
the beneﬁt of saving computational resources, while we considered it as a general learning method.
Concurrent to our our work, Anonymous (2023) focuses on internalizing step-by-step reasoning,
and they corroborated our ﬁndings on much large models and a much wider range of datasets.
9

===== page 10 =====
Preprint
5
CONCLUSION
We present context distillation as a general method for learning, which can internalize abstract state-
ments, concrete examples, and step-by-step reasoning. Given that 1) it is general and delivers strong
performance, 2) future models will have stronger in-context learning capability, and 3) future tasks
will have longer descriptions and reasoning chains, we anticipate our methods to be increasingly
useful in the future.
6
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank Jacob Steinhardt, Sergey Levine, Kevin Yang, Nicholas Tomlin, and other members of the
Berkeley NLP group for their helpful feedback. We thank the TPU Research Cloud (TRC) program
for providing computational resources.
REFERENCES
Romero Adriana, Ballas Nicolas, K Samira Ebrahimi, Chassang Antoine, Gatta Carlo, and
B Yoshua. Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets. Proc. ICLR, 2, 2015.
Anonymous. Large language models can self-improve. In Submitted to The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=NiEtU7blzN. under review.
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones,
Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatﬁeld-Dodds, Danny Her-
nandez, Jackson Kernion, Kamal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack
Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. A general language assistant as a labora-
tory for alignment, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00861.
Alan Baddeley. Working memory. Science, 255(5044):556–559, 1992.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL http:
//github.com/google/jax.
Yanda Chen, Ruiqi Zhong, Sheng Zha, George Karypis, and He He.
Meta-learning via lan-
guage model in-context tuning. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 719–730, Dublin, Ireland, May
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.53.
URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.53.
Eunbi Choi, Yongrae Jo, Joel Jang, and Minjoon Seo. Prompt injection: Parameterization of ﬁxed
inputs, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.11349.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher
Hesse, and John Schulman. Training veriﬁers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Nicola De Cao, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. Editing factual knowledge in language models, 2021.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08164.
Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi, Ruiqi Zhong,
Wen-tau Yih, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Incoder: A generative model for code inﬁlling
and synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05999, 2022.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network, 2015a.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, et al. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2(7), 2015b.
10

===== page 11 =====
Preprint
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ra-
masesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, et al. Solving quantitative
reasoning problems with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14858, 2022.
Xiaodong Liu, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Improving multi-task deep neu-
ral networks via knowledge distillation for natural language understanding.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.09482, 2019.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher
Potts. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 142–150,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 2011. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/P11-1015.
Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov.
Locating and editing factual
associations in gpt, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05262.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. MetaICL: Learning to learn
in context. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2791–2809, Seattle,
United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
naacl-main.201. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.201.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization
via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3470–3487, Dublin,
Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.
244. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.244.
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D. Manning. Fast
model editing at scale, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.11309.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Au-
gustus Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models,
2021a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.00114.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin,
David Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al.
Show
your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.00114, 2021b.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text
transformer, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text
transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Nitarshan Rajkumar, Raymond Li, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. Evaluating the text-to-sql capabilities of
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00498, 2022.
Amit Sabne. Xla : Compiling machine learning for peak performance, 2020.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
Chafﬁn, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish Thakker,
Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak, De-
bajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen,
11

===== page 12 =====
Preprint
Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen,
Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Teven Le
Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M Rush. Multitask prompted
training enables zero-shot task generalization. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4.
J´er´emy Scheurer, Jon Ander Campos, Jun Shern Chan, Angelica Chen, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ethan
Perez. Learning from natural language feedback. In ACL Workshop on Learning with Natural
Language Supervision, 2022.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, An-
jana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, Eshaan
Pathak, Giannis Karamanolakis, Haizhi Gary Lai, Ishan Purohit, Ishani Mondal, Jacob Anderson,
Kirby Kuznia, Krima Doshi, Maitreya Patel, Kuntal Kumar Pal, Mehrad Moradshahi, Mihir Par-
mar, Mirali Purohit, Neeraj Varshney, Phani Rohitha Kaza, Pulkit Verma, Ravsehaj Singh Puri,
Rushang Karia, Shailaja Keyur Sampat, Savan Doshi, Siddhartha Mishra, Sujan Reddy, Sumanta
Patro, Tanay Dixit, Xudong Shen, Chitta Baral, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
and Daniel Khashabi. Benchmarking generalization via in-context instructions on 1,600+ lan-
guage tasks, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.07705.
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza Mirzaei, An-
jana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David Stap, et al.
Benchmarking generalization via in-context instructions on 1,600+ language tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.07705, 2022b.
Zirui Wang, Adams Wei Yu, Orhan Firat, and Yuan Cao. Towards zero-label language learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.09193, 2021.
Peter C Wason and J St BT Evans. Dual processes in reasoning? Cognition, 3(2):141–154, 1974.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.11903, 2022b.
Qizhe Xie, Minh-Thang Luong, Eduard Hovy, and Quoc V. Le. Self-training with noisy student
improves imagenet classiﬁcation. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10684–10695, 2020. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01070.
Ze Yang, Linjun Shou, Ming Gong, Wutao Lin, and Daxin Jiang. Model compression with two-
stage multi-teacher knowledge distillation for web question answering system. In Proceedings of
the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 690–698, 2020.
Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene
Li, Qingning Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. Spider: A large-scale
human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-SQL task. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
3911–3921, Brussels, Belgium, October-November 2018. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-1425. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-1425.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah D. Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with
reasoning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.14465.
Ruiqi Zhong, Kristy Lee, Zheng Zhang, and Dan Klein.
Adapting language models for zero-
shot learning by meta-tuning on dataset and prompt collections.
In Findings of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 2856–2878, Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
ﬁndings-emnlp.244.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.
244.
12

===== page 13 =====
Preprint
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Sch¨arli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schu-
urmans, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi.
Least-to-most prompting enables complex
reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.
Pei Zhou, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Behnam Hedayatnia, Seokhwan Kim, Jay Pujara, Xiang Ren,
Yang Liu, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Think before you speak: Using self-talk to generate implicit
commonsense knowledge for response generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08501, 2021.
13

===== page 14 =====
Preprint
teacher
Pre-distillation Student
Post-Distillation Student
sent
RougeL
ent
sent
RougeL
ent
sent
RougeL
ent
positive
94.0
4.8
13.0
0.24
0.6
2.5
0.96
4.8
14.4
neutral
0.54
3.6
9.9
0.24
0.6
2.5
0.34
7.0
14.2
Table 4: Controlled generation via-context distillation. The “sent” column reports the average sen-
timent score of generations from the model, and the “ent” column refers to the model’s estimated
output entropy in nats. We see that by distilling the positive control instruction into the model, we
can obtain a model which outputs greater positive sentiment text without signiﬁcantly sacriﬁcing
output coherence (RougeL) or output diversity (entropy).
A
OTHER APPLICATIONS
We show that context distillation could be applied to other applications, such as controlled text
generation or factual knowledge editing.
A.1
CONTROLLED TEXT GENERATION VIA CONTEXT DISTILLATION
By distilling prompts that describe the desired behavior (e.g. don’t output toxic language or only
generate positive sentiment text), we can exert a form of control in language models. To test this,
we prompt our TK-Instruct model to complete negative movie reviews from the IMDB sentiment
classiﬁcation dataset (Maas et al., 2011).
The teacher template contains the instruction to complete the movie review speciﬁcally to end the
review on a positive note, and the student template contains the instruction just to complete the
review without any other speciﬁcation. After distillation, the student should learn to internalize the
abstract control preference for positive movie reviews.
We evaluate our models by asking GPT-3 to verify that our model’s generation is indeed positive. As
shown in Table 4, context distillation allows us to control our language model to generate positive
reviews.
A.2
FACTUAL KNOWLEDGE EDITING WITH CONTEXT DISTILLATION
Context distillation also provides a natural way to edit the factual knowledge implicitly internalized
by language models, by distilling a prompt that states a new or edited declarative fact. This is in
contrast to prior works (Mitchell et al., 2021; De Cao et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022) on fact editing,
which instead perform a constrained optimization procedure that directly learns an edit to the model
parameters, corresponding to the factual knowledge update.
We use the challenging Counterfact dataset from Meng et al. (2022) to test our method’s fact editing
ability. Each instance of the Counterfact task involves editing the object of a given factual relation.
Ideally, the language models should consistently apply the new fact under signiﬁcant paraphrases
to the original relation and context changes; the model should also not update the unrelated knowl-
edge. To measure this, the Counterfact dataset provides a set of paraphrase prompts (signiﬁcant
paraphrases of the original fact, which the LM should consistently edit), neighborhood prompts (un-
related facts that share the same object as the original pre-edit fact, on which the model should not
change their predictions), and attribute prompts (un-related facts which share the same object ad the
new post-edit fact, which should not change).
We perform fact editing experiments on our TK-Instruct model. For a randomly selected fact cor-
responding to each of the 34 unique relations in the Counterfact dataset, we synthesize a teacher
template, which includes a description of the fact to be edited and instructions not to edit unrelated
facts. We also use GPT-3 to help us generate a new attribute, paraphrase, and neighborhood prompt
for each fact edit to use as demonstrations of desired behavior in the prompt, alongside a natural
language explanation of why the fact edit is or is not applied in each case. We generate the inputs
P(x) using a few-shot prompt to TK-Instruct.
In Table 5, we evaluate our model on the set of paraphrase and neighborhood prompts in the
dataset. We report both the average score – 1[P(correct object) > P(incorrect object)] – and the
14

===== page 15 =====
Preprint
method
paraphrase
neighborhood
score
magnitude
score
magnitude
Teacher
73
29
58
8
Pre-distill student
34
-3
80
4
Post-distill student
79
28
48
-2
GPT-3
65
3
75
17
MEND
65
12
38
-12
ROME
89
33
74
4
Table 5: Performance of context distillation on fact editing. We see that context distillation is able
to recover the paraphrase score of the teacher but slightly under-performs in neighborhood score.
average magnitude – P(correct object) −P(incorrect object) – under the language model, where
P(correct object) and P(incorrect object) are the probability of the correct and incorrect objects
under the model, when conditioned on the relevant subject and relation. We see that context distilla-
tion is largely able to recover the fact editing performance of the teacher and performs comparably
in absolute score to current SOTA approaches to fact editing – ROME (Meng et al., 2022) and
MEND (Mitchell et al., 2021). Notice that we show these numbers for the readers to interpret our
result and we emphasize that our method is not directly comparable to theirs, since we use much
more computational resources.
Unfortunately, our prompted TK-Instruct teacher model performs poorly on neighborhood prompts,
which also leads to poor performance of the student model. We expect this issue to be largely
resolved by context distilling larger and more capable language models. To demonstrate this, we
evaluate GPT-3 on this task with the same prompt, which we can see in Table 5 performs much
better on these neighborhood prompts. While we cannot perform context distillation on GPT-3 due
to limitations in OpenAI’s API, we expect these improvements to carry over to the distilled model.
B
EXPERIMENT DETAILS
B.1
INSTRUCTION-TUNED T5-11B.
Following the procedure of (Wang et al., 2022a), we ﬁne-tuned the 11B T5 LM-adapted model (Raf-
fel et al., 2019), on Natural Instructions V2 (Wang et al., 2022a), a large dataset of 1600+ language
tasks which includes, for each task, a task description, positive and negative in-context examples,
and natural language explanations of why the output is right or wrong for each of the in-context
examples. Prior work (Wang et al., 2022a) has used this dataset to train instruction-tuned models on
prompts consisting of only 2-positive examples or only 2-positive and negative examples with ex-
planations. To maximize the ﬂexibility of our instruction-tuned model, we instead instruction-tuned
on a distribution of randomized prompts, which consist of randomly chosen 0 to 3 positive exam-
ples, 0 to 3 negative examples, and whether there is an explanation or not. We trained the model for
9728 steps with a batch size of 16 and AdamW optimizer on 32 TPU-V3 cores. The model achieves
a RougeL score of 58 on the 2 positive, 2 negative with explanation test split, of unseen natural
instructions tasks.
B.2
FINETUNING LANGUAGE MODEL IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We run all experiments on 32 TPU-V3 cores, with the model parameters and optimizer states for
ﬁne-tuning sharded equally across all cores. Our codebase is built in Jax (Bradbury et al., 2018;
Sabne, 2020) using the PJIT function to handle the model parallel training and inference.
B.3
GENERAL EXPERIMENT DETAILS
For all experiments, except where denoted otherwise, we distill on 4096 examples for 1 epoch with
batch size 16 with AdamW optimizer. We use a learning rate of 1e-5 with TK-Instruct and 1e-4 with
Incoder. We use 0 weight decay for all experiments.
15

===== page 16 =====
Preprint
Figure 5: Distilling explanations for 10 tasks from the Natural Instructions V2 test set. Each point
corresponds to a task in the ﬁgure. “In-context Margin” quantiﬁes how much the explanations help
the teacher by measuring the difference in RougeL of TK-Instruct with and without explanations
on each task, and “Distillation Margin” quantiﬁes how much the student learns from the teacher by
measuring the difference between the RougeL score of the student after distillation and the RougeL
score of TK-Instruct without explanations on each task. We observe a positive correlation between
the utility of the explanations to the teacher and how much our student learns.
model
SG COPA
Meta-Woz
Tweet-QA
ROCStories
c ↑
w ↓
c ↑
w ↓
c ↑
w ↓
c ↑
w ↓
Teacher
74
-
74
-
80
-
97
-
Pre-distill Student
63
62
0
0
51
51
80
78
“Na¨ıve” Post-distill Student 1
70
78
26
13
59
47
98
99
“Mixed” Post-distill Student 1
79
15
38
00
63
0
96
46
“Na¨ıve” Post-distill Student 2
77
85
34
29
61
31
98
97
“Mixed” Post-distill Student 2
76
18
47
0
63
0
94
44
Table 6: We distill the student to associate 4 task instructions with task ids, we then override this
association by permuting the task ids. “Student 1” refers to the the student after this ﬁrst step of
task-id association, and “Student 2” refers to the student after overriding the task-id association.
We see that in general “Mixed” students successfully distill the task-id associations. We report the
correct association accuracy (“c”) and the wrong association accuracy score (“w”) over all four tasks
we associate. We ﬁnd that the “Mixed” variant successfully overwrites the previous updates, as it
achieves a low score of wrong index association.
B.4
DISTILLING ABSTRACT STATEMENTS DETAILS
Learning from natural language explanations details (hypothesis 2).
We present a scatter plot
of the “In-context Margin” verses the “Distillation Margin” for our experiment on learning from
natural language explanations in Figure 5.
Distilling task id associations details (hypothesis 3).
We present detailed, per-task results for our
task id association experiment in Table 6.
B.5
DISTILLING CONCRETE EXAMPLES DETAILS
Gradient descent details (hypothesis 4).
For gradient descent we ﬁt all training examples into
a single batch and train for a 25 epochs using the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-5.
We report the performance of the epoch with the highest average exact set match score across all
databases.
16

===== page 17 =====
Preprint
Distilling long contexts details (hypothesis 5).
To estimate the per-token log-probabilities of the
y sampled from the teacher ensemble for distillation, we average the probabilities of each y under
8 teacher prompts. We estimate the teacher performance by performing greedy decoding on the
ensemble of 8 prompts uniformly sampled from the set of all 4 choose 8 teacher prompts. For each
database, we distill two students with different in-context examples in the prompt, and we report the
average exact-set match accuracy for both of these students.
B.6
DISTILLING STEP-BY-STEP REASONING DETAILS
Distilling scratchpads with T5-small (hypothesis 6).
All baselines were trained for 1000 epochs
– except “Scratchpad then Direct” which was trained for 1000 epochs to predict scratchpads and
then 1000 epochs to directly predict the answer – with a batch size of 8, a learning rate of 3e-4, and
AdamW optimizer. We report performance at the end of training on 10k unseen addition problems.
Transfering step-by-step reasoning details (hypothesis 7).
Since TK-Instruct cannot success-
fully do scratchpad addition from a few shot prompt, to initialize the teacher, we ﬁrst ﬁne-tune TK-
Instruct on the same distribution of 500 scratchpad examples from the previous experiment mixed in
with 4096 randomly selected examples from the “2 positive” split of Natural Instructions-V2 train-
ing set, such that the teacher doesn’t lose its ability to respond to prompts. We train the teacher for
32 epochs, at which point it achieves 97% accuracy on 2000 held-out scratchpad addition problems.
Our student is trained for 3 epochs on a dataset consisting of 10k distillation examples mixed in
with 65536 randomly selected examples from the same split of Natural-Instructions-V2 training set
as the teacher.
17
