[1.2] A global workspace in language models

Modern large language models (LLMs) are known to perform sophisticated, multi-step internal computations in order to select their actions [cite: lindsey2025biology,gurnee2025when,yang2024large,geva2023dissecting,li2024understanding,olsson2022context,wang2022interpretability] . As part of their internal processing, might LLMs have developed a global workspace of their own, to serve a functional role analogous to conscious access? It is not obvious that they should; in the brain, the workspace is closely associated with recurrent dynamics and brain region interactions that have no direct analog in the transformer architecture on which LLMs are based. On the other hand, maintaining a global workspace is likely computationally useful: a common representational format allows intermediate results to be written once and read by many neural processes. A language model that must chain reasoning steps, apply general operations in arbitrary contexts, and answer questions about its own processing also stands to benefit from this organization. Even if the implementations differ, it is natural to ask whether the functional properties associated with the global workspace have emerged in LLMs.

What would it mean for an LLM to have a global workspace? LLMs represent internal states as high-dimensional vectors, which are composed of more primitive vector representations of specific concepts. These representations encode diverse kinds of information, ranging from low-level bookkeeping—the part of speech of the present word [cite: tenney2019bert,liu2019linguistic] , or the length in characters of a line of text [cite: gurnee2025when] —to higher-level abstractions like entities (e.g. the Golden Gate Bridge [cite: templeton2024scaling] ), psychological states (e.g. desperation [cite: sofroniew2026twheemotion] ), and situational knowledge (e.g. the awareness of being in an evaluation [cite: anthropic2025sonnet45] ). If language models possess anything like a global workspace, we might posit that some of these representations belong to it, but not all. Thus, our question becomes: within LLMs’ repertoire of vector representations, is there a privileged subset that plays a computational role analogous to the global workspace? We define a subset of vector representations as workspace-like if it satisfies the following properties, which mirror the properties characteristic of conscious access described above:

Verbal report. When the model is asked what it is thinking about, it names concepts represented in the workspace. Swapping one active workspace vector for another changes its answer to match.

Directed modulation. When instructed to hold a concept in mind, or perform mental calculations, the model is capable of activating and computing with workspace vectors, independent of its outputs. In addition, information that is not typically represented in the workspace can be pulled in when the task requires it.

Internal reasoning. Workspace vectors can be used to represent the value of intermediate computations, when the model chains inferential steps or composes plans, and intervening on them is sufficient to redirect the conclusion.

Flexible generalization. The same representation serves as a valid argument to many different downstream computations. In other words, a workspace vector lifted from one context and placed in another is correctly operated on by whatever function the new context supplies.

Selectivity. The workspace comprises a small subset of the total representational content of the model’s activations. It is required for only a fraction of the model’s behavior, and in particular is not involved in pervasive, routine processing like text parsing or grammatical fluency.

In this paper, we provide evidence that LLMs do possess such workspace-like representations. We identified them by searching for representations satisfying the first property, namely those that are verbalizable. We then discovered that, rather surprisingly, they satisfy the others. These representations consist of a small, evolving set of unspoken words, neither pure echoes of the input nor predictions of the next token, naming the concepts the model is currently reasoning with. Below, we provide stylized illustrations of some of the experiments we performed to demonstrate these properties, which are expounded on in detail in later sections.

[fig-1] Figure 1: Five functional properties of a global workspace, and stylized illustrations of experiments we use to test for them in language models.

