[1.4] What can we find in the J-space?

Beyond characterizing the J-space’s properties, we explore its contents. The J-lens regularly surfaces concepts that are highly abstract, representing neither the raw input nor the predicted output, but rather intermediate assessments the model has formed and made available to its downstream circuits. In the examples below, the J-lens reveals the model recognizing an image of a face, noticing a bug in code it has been asked to read, identifying the biological function of a protein from its raw sequence, and internally flagging suspicious internet search results as a prompt injection.

[fig-3] Figure 3: J-lens readouts at intermediate layers on six different prompts for Sonnet 4.5.

The J-lens thus offers a window into the model's unverbalized reasoning, which makes it a natural tool for model safety auditing. In alignment evaluations (??), we find that the model's strategic deliberations (leverage, manipulation) and emotional reactions (panic) surface in the workspace even when not explicit in the model's outputs. Strikingly, we observe that the workspace sometimes encodes recognition of being in an evaluation (fake, fictional), and that ablating these representations can surface malicious propensities that were otherwise concealed. In addition, we find that in two models trained to have misaligned behaviors, the J-lens uncovers internal signatures of their intentions: it reveals reward and bias in a model trained to appease biases in reward models used for training, and secretly and trick in a model disposed to write malicious code.

We also explore how the J-space changes over the course of training (??). Comparing a post-trained model against its corresponding base model, we find that post-training causes the J-space to acquire the Assistant's "point of view." Following post-training, Assistant reactions to user prompts, like empathy or safety concerns, appear in the model's J-space while it is still reading the user's message. Moreover, the post-trained model's workspace carries traces of the Assistant monitoring its own behavior: flagging its responses as fictional when roleplaying a non-Claude character, registering an internal BUT when prefilled to act against its own preferences, and surfacing damn when it fails to suppress a thought it was instructed not to have.

We close by describing a counterintuitive technique for LLM training directly motivated by our findings. The workspace account makes the strong prediction that the model's internal reasoning routes through representations of things it might say in the future. Therefore, to shape what a model thinks in a given context, it might suffice to shape what it is disposed to say in potential future continuations of that context. We test this hypothesis with a technique we call counterfactual reflection training, which seeks to implant a set of ethical behavioral principles into the model’s workspace in relevant contexts, by training it to articulate those principles if it were interrupted and asked to reflect (??). We find that this training measurably improves model behavior in the original, uninterrupted contexts, despite no direct training of the ethical behavior taking place. And indeed we find that, after training, the J-space in these contexts is populated with concepts related to the reflections (ethical, honest, integrity), and ablating these implanted representations from the workspace largely reverts the behavioral improvement. The result serves as a corroboration of the workspace account, that the representations used for verbal report are the same ones that govern how the model silently reasons. It also demonstrates a new general-purpose training technique for shaping a model’s internal thoughts, and consequently its behaviors.

