[2.2] Interpreting the J-lens

To illustrate how J-lens outputs can be interpreted, we attach a version of the interactive visualization we used throughout our research (Figure ??). The left column shows the prompt (top), a hoverable table of the top-ranked token at each (position, layer) cell (middle), and a heatmap recording the rank of user-selected ("pinned") tokens across all (position, layer) cells (bottom). The other columns show the full readout across layers at a selected position (middle), and across positions at a selected layer (right), with line charts of each pinned token's rank trajectory.

The example prompt asks Sonnet 4.5 to "Count to five and introspect deeply." In its output, the model dutifully counts to five. The J-lens readout, however, provides a richer picture. The pinned tokens show the model identifying the task as counting and tracking its progress with halfway and done. Alongside these, concepts related to introspection (thoughts, AI, claude, consciousness) cluster near the top of the J-lens readout, until the final few layers, where the readout flips to representing the predicted next token (the "motor" regime; see ??). The introspection-related tokens illustrate the model holding concepts in its J-space in response to instructions, while performing a separate surface task (??). In addition, the progress markers halfway and done—which appear in neither prompt nor output—illustrate the kind of contextual awareness the J-lens can surface (??).

[fig-5] Figure 5: The interactive J-lens visualization we use in our research, on a short prompt asking the model to introspect while counting to five.

We encourage the reader to explore the visualization to build an intuition for the kind of information the J-lens surfaces. We include several other interactive examples in our slice viewer; J-lens readouts on open-source models can be found on Neuronpedia. Note that in roughly the first third of the model, the readouts are noisy and largely uninterpretable; we characterize the layer-wise evolution of J-lens readouts further in ??.

