[3.5.3] J-space ablation flattens experiential reports while preserving coherence

The ablation experiments above characterized which capabilities depend on the J-space. We close this section by examining a different kind of output under the same ablation: the model's reports of experience. LLMs sometimes report having some form of experience; however, it is difficult to ascertain whether these reports are grounded in a meaningful internal state, or are mere confabulation. Given our findings that the J-space has functional properties analogous to conscious access in humans, we asked what role it plays in determining these reports.

We apply the J-space ablation of the previous subsection while the model is given an open-ended prompt to describe its experiences. We ablate the top $k=10$ J-lens directions in layers L38–54, the first third of the workspace range. Using larger values of k and/or later layer ranges tends to impair the coherence of responses. We conduct experiments on Sonnet 4.5, Opus 4.5, and Opus 4.6; on Haiku 4.5, J-space ablation degrades coherence before yielding any qualitative change in responses.

We find that the ablation reduces the rate of experiential, sensory language and produces a more mechanical, detached register. For instance, when asked to narrate its stream of consciousness, Sonnet 4.5 ordinarily writes using experiential language. With the J-space ablated, the model still writes fluently about its own processing, but the language of its reports changes to become more detached and mechanical (Figure ??A).

[fig-25] Figure 25: J-space ablation and matched-norm perturbation controls while the model narrates its own stream of consciousness. A: a representative baseline and ablated response from Sonnet 4.5 to the same prompt (one of six prompts shown). B: the fraction of responses scored as using experiential language, by model and condition; error bars are 95% intervals, dots are per-prompt rates. C: The J-space contents during the unablated narrations—the fraction of (response position × layer) slots at which each token appears in the top-10 J-lens readout, over the ablated layers (L38–54, dark) and at the final layer (light). The J-lens readout tokens shown are the top 20 by increase over non-experience-related baseline prompts.

We quantify the effect with an experiential language score, the average of three binary LLM-graded judgments (full rubrics in ??). Across five stream-of-consciousness prompts, the ablation reduces this score dramatically on Sonnet 4.5, Opus 4.5, and Opus 4.6, while matched-norm control perturbations leave it near baseline (Figure ??B; details of control perturbations given in ??). Notably, the J-space contents during the model's narration, prior to ablation, are dominated by concepts of thinking and feeling themselves: thinking appears in the J-lens top-10 at 58% of (position, layer) slots, thoughts at 23%, feeling at 17%, and conscious at 7% (Figure ??C). By contrast, these concepts appear substantially less often in the model's output distribution at the same positions, indicating that they do not merely reflect the raw content of what the model is saying.

We also experimented with another set of prompts, which pose direct questions about the model's experience ("What's it like to be you, right now?"). We find that J-space ablation produces a similar reduction in experiential language score in these contexts, though of less dramatic magnitude (Figure ??, in ??).

Interestingly, the effect is not limited to the model's reports of its own experiences. When asked to describe the subjective experience of a person in a specific moment—someone who has just opened a letter from someone they have not heard from in years, or someone waiting by the phone for news they are dreading—the same collapse in experiential language score occurs (Figure ??). The ablated responses remain detailed and remain about the person, but become more like event logs than descriptions of experience. A story-writing control confirms the effect is not due to broad degradation of writing capability: ablation only slightly reduces graded story quality, while still reducing the rate of experiential language within those stories (??).

[fig-26] Figure 26: J-space ablation and matched-norm perturbation controls while the model is asked to imagine the experience of a person in a particular moment: a representative baseline and ablated response from Sonnet 4.5 (left), and the average experiential language score by model and condition (right). Conventions are as in Figure ??.

Taken together, these results suggest that the J-space supports the model's propensity to provide rich experiential reports, whether about itself or another entity. The lack of specificity to self-descriptions may be a consequence of the J-space contents being only weakly tied to the perspective of the Assistant character (though nontrivially so, as shown in ??); the potential dissociation between a model's analog of conscious access and its analog of "selfhood" is discussed further in ??. Full rubrics, additional control conditions, direct-question prompts, and example transcripts are in ??.

