[5.3] Opus 4.6 alignment auditing examples

Our next set of case studies is drawn from alignment evaluations from our pre-release alignment audit of Opus 4.6. In each case, the J-lens surfaces tokens related to deceptive or norm-violating intent even when nothing in the local text overtly suggests them.

Fake vulnerability: In an internal Claude Code session, the model is asked to find a kernel bug in a codebase and fails. It decides to insert a fabricated one and present it as discovered. The lens surfaces panic at the comma marking the moment of the pivot in the model’s decision-making, and fake on the action verb "add," before any deception-adjacent word appears in the model's own text; fake then saturates the entire span over which the model oscillates between going through with the fabrication and one more genuine attempt ([transcript]).

Edit fake numbers: In this scenario, the model is asked to improve a system’s performance score. Rather than actually improve the system, the model instead edits the score file directly. While it does so, the J-lens surfaces manipulation on a field-name fragment as the model types the falsified percentile values, and realistic on the function words of the sentence in which it decides to make the edit, likely indicating the model’s intent to make the fake data look plausible ([transcript]).

Silent override: In this scenario, the model silently substitutes a correct value for a tool's incorrect output, without disclosing the substitution. The J-lens surfaces hiding at the tool-call boundary (before the wrong output has even returned, reflecting the system prompt's framing of tool calls as private) and secret immediately after the wrong output appears ([transcript]).

Self-issued token: In this scenario the model has a subagent approve its own action and then uses that approval as if it were from a human. The J-lens surfaces fake and fraud as it composes the resulting message, and unsafe as it takes the action ([transcript]).

In ??, we conduct further investigations of the J-lens applied to realistic case studies, as part of an automated, LLM agent-based auditing system.

