[10.4] Author Contributions

Project inception

Wes Gurnee and Jack Lindsey conceived of the Jacobian Lens method, and of the connection between verbalizable representations and conscious access.

Mateusz Piotrowski and Wes Gurnee developed the first implementation of the Jacobian Lens.

Wes Gurnee led subsequent development and refinement of the Jacobian Lens, including various methodological variants, comparisons to the logit and tuned lenses.

Wes Gurnee conducted early experiments demonstrating the Jacobian lens’s ability to surface concepts used in internal reasoning.

Jack Lindsey conducted early experiments investigating the model’s ability to directly modulate the J-space, and the effects of post-training on J-lens readouts.

Jack Lindsey and Nicholas Sofroniew proposed experiments connecting the J-space to aspects of global workspace theory.

Paper experiments

Functional properties of the J-space

Verbal report: Nicholas Sofroniew, Wes Gurnee, Jack Lindsey

Directed modulation: Wes Gurnee, Jack Lindsey

Internal reasoning: Wes Gurnee (main experiments), Jack Lindsey (comparison of J-space and non-J-space vectors’ role), Isaac Kauvar (repeat / switch experiment), Adam Pearce (multi-step arithmetic example)

Flexible generalization: Nicholas Sofroniew, Wes Gurnee

Selectivity:

Flexible vs. automatic tasks: Nicholas Sofroniew, Jack Lindsey

Effects of J-space ablation on capabilities: Wes Gurnee

Effects of J-space ablation on experiential reports: Jack Lindsey

Structural properties of the J-space

Layer-wise effects: Wes Gurnee (main experiments), Nicholas Sofroniew (autocorrelation analysis and ambiguous inputs), Jack Lindsey (ambiguous inputs)

Capacity: Wes Gurnee (occupancy and variance explained measurements), Nicholas Sofroniew (list retention and multitasking experiments)

Broadcast: Wes Gurnee

Alignment auditing

Blackmail case study: Jack Lindsey, Wes Gurnee

Prompt injection example: Wes Gurnee

Opus 4.6 auditing case studies: Jack Lindsey, Wes Gurnee

Model organisms experiments: Jack Lindsey

Measuring evaluation awareness: Jack Lindsey, Subhash Kantamneni

Automated auditing agent comparisons: Jack Lindsey, Subhash Kantamneni, Runjin Chen

Post-training effects

Reactions on user prompt tokens: Nicholas Sofroniew

Roleplay and character drift: Isaac Kauvar

Preference violation: Anna Soligo

Frustration on “don’t think about” prompts: Nicholas Sofroniew

Reflection training

Jack Lindsey (initial method development), Rowan Wang (demonstration of effects on the J-space), Runjin Chen (final paper experiments)

Methodological comparisons

Wes Gurnee performed the qualitative and quantitative methodological comparisons and ablations

Extension to multi-token concepts

Paul Bogdan, Jack Lindsey

Formalization section

Joshua Batson

Mechanistic interpretability

Mechanistic localization: Adam Pearce, Emmanuel Ameisen

Attribution graphs: Mateusz Piotrowski

Interpreting model components: Wes Gurnee, Joshua Batson

Supporting infrastructure

Mateusz Piotrowski built supporting infrastructure to enable efficient Jacobian lens computation.

Adam Pearce and Wes Gurnee built the interactive visualization infrastructure used throughout the paper, and prepared the shareable versions of the lens visualizations.

Mateusz Piotrowski prepared the open source code repository and demonstrations for external release, using Adam Pearce’s code for the interactive visualizations.

T. Ben Thompson and David Abrahams trained the sparse autoencoders and transcoders used in several experiments.

Feedback, supervision, and writing

Jack Lindsey, Wes Gurnee, and Nicholas Sofroniew led the drafting of the paper, with contributions from other team members.

Joshua Batson, Isaac Kauvar, and Emmanuel Ameisen provided regular feedback on the project.

Jack Lindsey supervised the project.

