[2] Problem Setup

A key challenge to our agenda of reverse engineering neural networks is the curse of dimensionality: as we study ever-larger models, the volume of the latent space representing the model's internal state that we need to interpret grows exponentially. We do not currently see a way to understand, search or enumerate such a space unless it can be decomposed into independent components, each of which we can understand on its own.

In certain limited cases, it is possible to side step these issues by rewriting neural networks in ways that don't make reference to certain hidden states. For example, in A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits [cite: nelhage2021mathematical] , we were able to analyze a one-layer attention-only network without addressing this problem. But this approach becomes impossible if we consider even a simple standard one-layer transformer with an MLP layer with a ReLU activation function. Understanding such a model requires us to have a way to decompose the MLP layer.

In some sense, this is the simplest language model we profoundly don't understand. And so it makes a natural target for our paper. We aim to take its MLP activations – the activations we can't avoid needing to decompose – and decompose them into "features":

[fig-2] We aim to take its MLP activations – the activations we can't avoid needing to decompose – and decompose them into "features":

Crucially, we decompose into more features than there are neurons. This is because we believe that the MLP layer likely uses superposition [cite: arora2018linear,goh2016decoding,olah2020zoom,elhage2022superposition] to represent more features than it has neurons (and correspondingly do more useful non-linear work!). In fact, in our largest experiments we'll expand to have 256 times more features than neurons, although we'll primarily focus on a more modest 8× expansion.

[table-1] In fact, in our largest experiments we'll expand to have 256 times more features than neurons, although we'll primarily focus on a more modest 8× expansion.

 | Transformer | Sparse Autoencoder
Layers | 1 Attention Block 1 MLP Block (ReLU) | 1 ReLU (up) 1 Linear (down)
MLP Size | 512 | 512 (1×) – 131,072 (256×)
Dataset | The Pile [cite: gao2020pile] (100 billion tokens) | Transformer MLP Activations (8 billion samples)
Loss | Autoregressive Log-Likelihood | L2 reconstruction + L1 on hidden layer activation

In the following subsections, we will motivate this setup at more length. Additionally, a more detailed discussion of the architectural details and training of these models can be found in the appendix.

