[2.2] What makes a good decomposition?

Suppose that a dictionary exists such that the MLP activation of each datapoint is in fact well approximated by a sparse weighted sum of features as in equation 1. That decomposition will be useful for interpreting the neural network if:

We can interpret the conditions under which each feature is active. That is, we have a description of which datapoints $j$ cause the feature to activate (i.e. for which $f_i(\mathbf{x}^j)$ is large) that makes sense on a diverse dataset (including potentially synthetic or off-distribution examples meant to test the hypothesis). (note: This property is closely related to the desiderata of Causality, Generality, and Purity discussed in Cammarata et al. [cite: cammarata2020curve] , and those provide an example of how we might make this property concrete in a specific instance.)

We can interpret the downstream effects of each feature, i.e. the effect of changing the value of $f_i$ on subsequent layers. This should be consistent with the interpretation in (1).

The features explain a significant portion of the functionality of the MLP layer (as measured by the loss; see How much of the model does our interpretation explain?).

A feature decomposition satisfying these criteria would allow us to:

Determine the contribution of a feature to the layer’s output, and the next layer’s activations, on a specific example.

Monitor the network for the activation of a specific feature (see e.g. speculation about safety-relevant features).

Change the behavior of the network in predictable ways by changing the values of some features. In multilayer models this could look like predictably influencing one layer by changing the feature activations in an earlier layer.

Demonstrate that the network has learned certain properties of the data.

Demonstrate that the network is using a given property of the data in producing its output on a specific example. (note: This is similar in spirit to the evidence provided by influence functions.)

Design inputs meant to activate a given feature and elicit certain outputs.

Of course, decomposing models into components is just the beginning of the work of mechanistic interpretability! It provides a foothold on the inner workings of models, allowing us to start in earnest on the task of unraveling circuits and building a larger-scale understanding of models.

