[2.3] Why not use architectural approaches?

In Toy Models of Superposition [cite: elhage2022superposition] , we highlighted several different approaches to solving superposition. One of those approaches was to engineer models to simply not have superposition in the first place.

Initially, we thought that this might be possible but come with a large performance hit (i.e. produce models with greater loss). Even if this performance hit had been too large to use in practice for real models, we felt that success at creating monosemantic models would have been very useful for research, and in a lot of ways this felt like the "cleanest" approach for downstream analysis.

Unfortunately, having spent a significant amount of time investigating this approach, we have ultimately concluded that it is more fundamentally non-viable.

In particular, we made several attempts to induce activation sparsity during training to produce models without superposition, even to the point of training models with 1-hot activations. This indeed eliminates superposition, but it fails to result in cleanly-interpretable neurons! Specifically, we found that individual neurons can be polysemantic even in the absence of superposition. This is because in many cases models achieve lower loss by representing multiple features ambiguously (in a polysemantic neuron) than by representing a single feature unambiguously and ignoring the others.

To understand this, consider a toy model with a single neuron trained on a dataset with four mutually-exclusive features (A/B/C/D), each of which makes a distinct (correct) prediction for the next token, labeled in the same fashion. Further suppose that this neuron’s output is binary: it either fires or it doesn’t. When it fires, it produces an output vector representing the probabilities of the different possible next tokens.

We can calculate the cross-entropy loss achieved by this model in a few cases:

Suppose the neuron only fires on feature A, and correctly predicts token A when it does. The model ignores all of the other features, predicting a uniform distribution over tokens B/C/D when feature A is not present. In this case the loss is $\frac{3}{4}\ln 3 \approx 0.8$ .

Instead suppose that the neuron fires on both features A and B, predicting a uniform distribution over the A and B tokens. When the A and B features are not present, the model predicts a uniform distribution over the C and D tokens. In this case the loss is $\ln 2 \approx 0.7$ .

Because the loss is lower in case (2) than in case (1), the model achieves better performance by making its sole neuron polysemantic, even though there is no superposition.

This example might initially seem uninteresting because it only involves one neuron, but it actually points at a general issue with highly sparse networks. If we push activation sparsity to its limit, only a single neuron will activate at a time. We can now consider that single neuron and the cases where it fires. As seen earlier, it can still be advantageous for that neuron to be polysemantic.

Based on this reasoning, and the results of our experiments, we believe that models trained on cross-entropy loss will generally prefer to represent more features polysemantically than to represent fewer "true features" monosemantically, even in cases where sparsity constraints make superposition impossible.

Models trained on other loss functions do not necessarily suffer this problem. For instance, models trained under mean squared error loss (MSE) may achieve the same loss for both polysemantic and monosemantic representations (e.g. [cite: jermyn2022engineering] ), and for some feature importance curves they may actively prefer the monosemantic solution [cite: scherlis2022polysemanticity] . But language models are not trained with MSE, and so we do not believe architectural changes can be used to create fully monosemantic language models.

Note, however, that in learning to decompose models post-training we do use an MSE loss (between the activations and their representation in terms of the dictionary), so sparsity can inhibit superposition from forming in the learned dictionary. (Otherwise, we might have superposition "all the way down.")

