[2.5.1] How can we tell if the autoencoder is working?

Usually in machine learning we can quite easily tell if a method is working by looking at an easily-measured quantity like the test loss. We spent quite some time searching for an equivalent metric to guide our efforts here, and unfortunately have yet to find anything satisfactory.

We began by looking for an information-based metric, so that we could say in some sense that the best factorization is the one that minimizes the total information of the autoencoder and the data. Unfortunately, this total information did not generally correlate with subjective feature interpretability or activation sparsity. (Runs whose feature activations had an average L0 norm in the hundreds but low reconstruction error could have lower total information than those with smaller average L0 norm and higher reconstruction error.)

Thus we ended up using a combination of several additional metrics to guide our investigations:

Manual inspection: Do the features seem interpretable?

Feature density: we found that the number of “live” features and the percentage of tokens on which they fire to be an extremely useful guide. (See appendix for details.)

Reconstruction loss: How well does the autoencoder reconstruct the MLP activations? Our goal is ultimately to explain the function of the MLP layer, so the MSE loss should be low.

Toy models: Having toy models where we know the ground truth and so can cleanly evaluate the autoencoder’s performance was crucial to our early progress.

Interpreting or measuring some of these signals can be difficult, though. For instance, at various points we thought we saw features which at first didn’t make any sense, but with deeper inspection we could understand. Likewise, while we have identified some desiderata for the distribution of feature densities, there is much that we still do not understand and which prevents this from providing a clear signal of progress.

We think it would be very helpful if we could identify better metrics for dictionary learning solutions from sparse autoencoders trained on transformers.

