[2.6] The (one-layer) model we're studying

We chose to study a one-layer transformer model. We view this model as a testbed for dictionary learning, and in that role it brings three key advantages:

Because one-layer models are small they likely have fewer "true features" than larger models, meaning features learned by smaller dictionaries might cover all their "true features". Smaller dictionaries are cheaper to train, allowing for fast hyperparameter optimization and experimentation.

We can highly overtrain a one-layer transformer quite cheaply. We hypothesize that a very high number of training tokens may allow our model to learn cleaner representations in superposition.

We can easily analyze the effects features have on the logit outputs, because these are approximately linear in the feature activations. (note: Note that this linear structure makes it even more likely that features should be linear. On the one hand, this means that the linear representation hypothesis is more likely to hold for this model. On the other hand, it potentially means that our results are less likely to generalize to multilayer models. Fortunately, others have studied multilayer transformers with sparse autoencoders and found interpretable linear features, which gives us more confidence that what we see in the one-layer model indeed generalizes [cite: smith2023found,smith2023strong,cunningham2023autointerpretation] .) This provides helpful corroboration that the features we have found are not just telling us about the data distribution, and actually reflect the functionality of the model.

We trained two one-layer transformers with the same hyperparameters and datasets, differing only in the random seed used for initialization. We then learned dictionaries of many different sizes on both transformers, using the same hyperparameters for each matched pair of dictionaries but training on the activations of different tokens for each transformer.

We refer to the main transformer we study in this paper as the “A” transformer. We primarily use the other transformer (“B”) to study feature universality, as we can e.g. compare features learned from the “A” and “B” transformers and see how similar they are.

