[3] Detailed Investigations of Individual Features

The most important claim of our paper is that dictionary learning can extract features that are significantly more monosemantic than neurons. In this section, we give a detailed demonstration of this claim for a small number of features which activate in highly specific contexts.

The features we study respond to

Text written in Arabic script (like "الكتاب المختصر في حساب الجبر والمقابلة")

DNA sequences (like "CCTGGTACTGTACGAACGAACGAACGTAGCCTTGG")

base64 strings (like the final characters in "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ")

Text written in Hebrew script (like "בראשית ברא אלהים את השמים ואת הארץ")

For each learned feature, we attempt to establish the following claims:

The learned feature activates with high specificity for the hypothesized context. (When the feature is on the context is usually present.)

The learned feature activates with high sensitivity for the hypothesized context. (When the context is present, the feature is usually on.)

The learned feature causes appropriate downstream behavior.

The learned feature does not correspond to any neuron.

The learned feature is universal – a similar feature is found by dictionary learning applied to a different model.

To demonstrate claims 1–3, we devise computational proxies for each context, numerical scores estimating the (log-)likelihood that a string (or token) is from the specific context. The contexts chosen above are easy to model based on the defined sets of unicode characters involved. We model DNA sequences as random strings of characters from [ATCG] and we model base64 strings as random sequences of characters from [a-zA-Z0-9+/]. For Arabic script and Hebrew features, we exploit the fact that each language is written in a script consisting of well-defined Unicode blocks. Each computational proxy is then an estimate of the log-likelihood ratio of a string under the hypothesis versus under the full empirical distribution of the dataset. The full description of how we estimate $\log(P(s|\text{context}) / P(s))$ for each feature hypothesis is given in the appendix section on proxies.

In this section we primarily study the learned feature which is most active in each context. There are typically other features that also model that context, and we find that rare “gaps” in the sensitivity of a main feature are often explained by the activity of another. We discuss this phenomenon in detail in sections on Activation Sensitivity and Feature Splitting.

We take pains to demonstrate the specificity of each feature, as we believe that to be more important for ruling out polysemanticity. Polysemanticity typically involves neurons activating for clearly unrelated concepts. (note: For example, one neuron in our transformer model responds to a mix of academic citations, English dialogue, HTTP requests, and Korean text. In vision models, there is a classic example of a neuron which responds to cat faces and fronts of cars [cite: olah2017feature] .) If our proxy shows that a feature only activates in some relatively rare and specific context, that would exclude the typical form of polysemanticity.

[fig-7] If our proxy shows that a feature only activates in some relatively rare and specific context, that would exclude the typical form of polysemanticity.

We finally note that the features in this section are cherry-picked to be easier to analyze. Defining simple computational proxies for most features we find, such as text concerning fantasy games, would be difficult, and we analyze them in other ways in the following section.

