[3.1.1] Activation Specificity

Our first step is to show that this feature fires almost exclusively on text in Arabic script. We give each token an "Arabic script" score using an estimated likelihood ratio $\log(P(s|\text{Arabic Script}) / P(s))$ , and break down the histogram of feature activations by that score. Arabic text is quite rare in our overall data distribution – just 0.13% of training tokens — but it makes up 81% of the tokens on which our feature is active. That percentage varies significantly by feature activity level, from 25% when the feature is barely active to 98% when the feature activation is above 5.

[fig-8] That percentage varies significantly by feature activity level, from 25% when the feature is barely active to 98% when the feature activation is above 5.

We also show dataset examples demonstrating different levels of feature activity. In interpreting them, it's important to note that Arabic Unicode characters are often split into multiple tokens. For example, the character ث (U+062B) is tokenized as \xd8 followed by \xab. (note: This kind of split tokenization is common for Unicode characters outside the Latin script and the most common characters from other Unicode blocks.) When this happens, A/1/3450 typically only fires on the last token of the Unicode character.

The upper parts of the activation spectrum, above an activity of ~5, clearly respond with high specificity to Arabic script. What should we make of the lower portions? We have three hypotheses:

The proxy is imperfect. It has false negatives due to common characters which are in other Unicode blocks (e.g., whitespace, punctuation), and also due to places where tokenization has created strange behavior. (note: For example, in the figure above, there is a newline character ⏎ that our feature fires on but our proxy assigns a low score to because it is outside the Unicode block.)

The model may be imperfect (but still calibrated). If features activate proportional to their "confidence" that some property is present, then we should expect them to sometimes be wrong in their weak activations. Although it might seem silly to fail to recognize which language a piece of text is, this is a very weak one layer transformer model, and the fact that characters are often split into multiple tokens adds additional difficulty.

The autoencoder may be imperfect: If the width of our autoencoder is less than the number of "true features" being used by the model, then unrecovered features may show up as low activations across many of our learned features.

Regardless, large feature activations have larger impacts on model predictions, (note: Why do we believe large activations have larger effects? In the case of a one-layer transformer like the one we consider in this paper, we can make a strong case for this: features have a linear effect on the logits (modulo rescaling by layer norm), and so a larger activation of the feature has a larger effect on the logits. In the case of larger models, this follows from a lot of conjectures and heuristic arguments (e.g. the abundance of linear pathways in the model and the idea of linear features at each layer), and must be true for sufficiently small activations by continuity, but doesn't have a watertight argument.) so getting their interpretation right matters most. One useful tool for assessing the impact of false positives at low activation levels is the "expected value plot" of Cammarata et al. [cite: cammarata2020curve] . We plot the distribution of feature activations weighted by activation level. Most of the magnitude of activation provided by this feature comes from dataset examples which are in Arabic script.

[fig-9] Most of the magnitude of activation provided by this feature comes from dataset examples which are in Arabic script.

