[3.1.3] Feature Downstream Effects

Because the autoencoder is trained on model activations, the features it learns could in theory represent structure in the training data alone, without any relevance to the network’s function. We show instead that the learned features have interpretable causal effects on model outputs which make sense in light of the features’ activations. Note that these downstream effects are not inputs to the dictionary learning process, which only sees the activations of the MLP layer. If the resulting features also mediate important downstream behavioral effects then we can be confident that the feature is truly connected to the MLP’s functional role in the network and not just a property of the underlying data.

We begin with a linear approximation to the effect of each feature on the model logits. We compute the logit weight following the path expansion approach of [cite: nelhage2021mathematical] , (note: (also called “logit attribution”, see similar work e.g. [cite: nanda2023patching] )) multiplying each feature direction by the MLP output weights, an approximation of the layer norm operation combining a projection to remove the mean and a diagonal matrix approximating the scaling terms, and the unembedding matrix ( $d_iW_{down}\pi L W_{unembed}$ ). Because the softmax function is shift-invariant there is no absolute scale for the logit weights; we shift these so that the median logit weight for each feature is zero.

Each feature, when active, makes some output tokens more likely and some output tokens less likely. We plot that distribution of logit weights. (note: We exclude weights corresponding to extremely rare or never used vocabulary elements. These are perhaps similar to the "anomalous tokens" (e.g., "SolidGoldMagikarp") of Rumbelow & Watkins [cite: rumbelow2023solid] .) There is a large primary mode at zero, and a second much smaller mode on the far right, the tokens whose likelihood most increases when our feature is on. This second mode appears to correspond to Arabic characters, and tokens which help represent Arabic script characters (especially \xd8 and \xd9, which are often the first half of the UTF-8 encodings of Arabic Unicode characters in the basic Arabic Unicode block).

[fig-10] This second mode appears to correspond to Arabic characters, and tokens which help represent Arabic script characters (especially \xd8 and \xd9, which are often the first half of the UTF-8 encodings of Arabic Unicode characters in the basic Arabic Unicode block).

This suggests that activating this feature increases the probability the network predicts Arabic script tokens. (note: There are in theory several ways the logit weights could overestimate the model's actual use of a feature: 1. It could be that these output weights are small enough that, when multiplied by activations, they don't have an appreciable effect on the model’s output. 2. The feature might only activate in situations where other features make these tokens extremely unlikely, such that the feature in fact has little effect. 3. It is possible that our approximation of linearizing the layer norm (see Framework [cite: nelhage2021mathematical] ) is poor. Based on the subsequent analysis, which confirms the logit weight effects, we do not believe these issues arise in practice.)

To visualize these effects on actual data, we causally ablate the feature. For a given dataset example, we run the context through the model until the MLP layer, decode the activations into features, then subtract off the activation of A/1/3450, artificially setting it to zero on the whole context, before applying the rest of the model. We visualize the effect of ablating the feature using underlines in the visualization; tokens whose predictions were helped by the feature (ablation decreased likelihood) are underlined in blue and tokens whose predictions were hurt by the feature (ablation increased likelihood) are underlined in red.

In the example on the right below we see that the A/1/3450 was active on every token in a short context (orange background). Ablating it hurt the predictions of all the tokens in Arabic script (purple underlines), but helped the prediction of the period . (orange underline). The rest of the figure displays contexts from two different ranges of feature activation levels. (The feature activation on the middle token of examples on the right ("subsample interval 5") is about half that of the middle token of examples on the left ("subsample interval 0")). We see that the feature was causally helping the model predictions on Arabic script through that full range, and the only tokens made less likely by the feature are punctuation shared with other scripts. The magnitudes of the impact are larger when the feature is more active.

[fig-11] The magnitudes of the impact are larger when the feature is more active.

We encourage interested readers to view the feature visualization for A/1 to review this and other effects.

We also validate that the feature's downstream effect is in line with our interpretation as an Arabic script feature by sampling from the model with the feature activity "pinned" at a high value. To do this, we start with a prefix 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 where the model has an expected continuation (keep in mind that this is a one layer model that is very weak!). We then instead set A/1/3450 to its maximum observed value and see how that changes the samples:

[fig-12] We then instead set A/1/3450 to its maximum observed value and see how that changes the samples:

