[3.1.4] The feature is not a neuron

This feature seems rather monosemantic, but some models have relatively monosemantic neurons, and we want to check that dictionary learning didn't merely hand us a particularly nice neuron. (note: Of course, some features might genuinely be neuron aligned. But we'd like to know that at least some of the features dictionary learning discovers were not trivial.) We first note that when we search for neurons with Arabic script in their top dataset 20 examples, only one neuron turns up, with a single example in Arabic script. (Eighteen of the remaining examples are in English, and one is in Cyrillic.)

We then look at the coefficients of the feature in the neuron basis, and find that the three largest coefficients by magnitude are all negative (!) and there are a full 27 neurons whose coefficients are at least 0.1 in magnitude.

[fig-13] We then look at the coefficients of the feature in the neuron basis, and find that the three largest coefficients by magnitude are all negative (!) and there are a full 27 neurons whose coefficients are at least 0.1 in magnitude.

It is of course possible that these neurons engage in a delicate game of cancellation, resulting in one particular neuron's primary activations being sharpened. To check for this, we find the neuron whose activations are most correlated to the feature's activations over a set of ~40 million dataset examples. (note: We also tried looking at the neurons which have the largest contribution to the dictionary vector for the feature. However, we found looking at the most correlated neuron to be more reliable – in earlier experiments, we found rare cases where the correlated method found a seemingly similar neuron, while the dictionary method did not. This may be because neurons can have different scales of activations.) The most correlated neuron (A/neurons/489) responds to a mixture of different non-English languages. (note: This makes sense as a superposition strategy: since languages are essentially mutually exclusive, they're natural to put in superposition with each other [cite: olah2023distributed]) We can see this by visualizing the activation distribution of the neuron – the dataset examples are all other languages, with Arabic script present only as a small sliver.

[fig-14] We can see this by visualizing the activation distribution of the neuron – the dataset examples are all other languages, with Arabic script present only as a small sliver.

Logit weight analysis is also consistent with this neuron responding to a mixture of languages. For example, in the figure below many of the top logit weights appear to include Russian and Korean tokens. Careful readers will observe a thin red sliver corresponding to rare Arabic script tokens in the distribution. These Arabic script tokens have weight values that are very slightly positive leaning overall, but some are negative.

[fig-15] These Arabic script tokens have weight values that are very slightly positive leaning overall, but some are negative.

Finally, scatter plots and correlations suggest the similarities between A/1/3450 and the neuron are non-zero, but quite minimal. (note: By analogy, this also applies to B/1/1334.) In particular, note how the y-axis of the logit weights scatter plot (corresponding to the feature) cleanly separates the Arabic script token logits, while the x-axis does not. More generally, note how the y-marginals both clearly exhibit specificity, but the x-marginals do not.

[fig-16] More generally, note how the y-marginals both clearly exhibit specificity, but the x-marginals do not.

We conclude that the features we study do not trivially correspond to a single neuron. The Arabic script feature would be effectively invisible if we only analyzed the model in terms of neurons.

