[3.1.5] Universality

We will now ask whether A/1/3450 is a universal feature that forms in other models and can be consistently discovered by dictionary learning. This would indicate we are discovering something more general about how one-layer transformers learn representations of the dataset.

We search for a similar feature in B/1, a dictionary learning run on a transformer trained on the same dataset but with a different random seed. We search for the feature with the highest activation correlation (note: "Activation correlation" is defined as the feature whose activations across 40,960,000 tokens has the highest Pearson correlation with those of A/1/3450.) and find B/1/1334 (corr=0.91), which is strikingly similar:

[fig-17] We search for the feature with the highest activation correlation and find B/1/1334 (corr=0.91), which is strikingly similar:

This feature clearly responds to Arabic script as well. If anything, it's nicer than our original feature – it's more specific in the 0–1 range. The logit weights tell a similar story:

[fig-18] This feature clearly responds to Arabic script as well. If anything, it's nicer than our original feature – it's more specific in the 0–1 range. The logit weights tell a similar story:

The effects of ablating this feature are also consistent with this (see the visualization for B/1/1334).

To more systematically analyze the similarities between A and B, we look at scatter plots comparing the activations or logit weights:

[fig-19] To more systematically analyze the similarities between A and B, we look at scatter plots comparing the activations or logit weights:

The activations are strongly correlated (Pearson correlation of 0.91), especially in the main Arabic mode.

The logit weights reveal a two-dimensional version of the bimodality we saw in the histogram for A/1, with logit weights for Arabic tokens clustering at the top right. The correlation is more modest than that of the activations because the distribution is dominated by a relatively uncorrelated mode in the center. We hypothesize this central mode corresponds to "weight interference" and that the shared outlier mode is the important observation – that is, the model may ideally prefer to have all those weights be zero, but due to superposition with other features and their weights, this isn't possible.

