[3.2.1] Activation Specificity and Sensitivity

We begin with the computational proxy for "is a DNA sequence", $\log(P(s|\text{DNA}) / P(s))$ . Because there are some vocabulary tokens, such as CAT, which could occur in DNA but also occur in other contexts, we always look at groups of at least two tokens when evaluating the proxy. The log-probabilities turn out to be quite bimodal, so we binarize the proxy (based on its sign). This binarized proxy then has a Pearson correlation of 0.8 with the feature activations.

[fig-20] This binarized proxy then has a Pearson correlation of 0.8 with the feature activations.

While the feature appears to be quite monosemantic in the feature's higher registers (all 10 random dataset examples above activation of 6.0 are DNA sequences), there is significant blue indicating the DNA proxy not firing in the lower registers. Below we show a grid of random examples at four activation levels (including feature off) where the proxy does and doesn't fire.

[fig-21] Below we show a grid of random examples at four activation levels (including feature off) where the proxy does and doesn't fire.

We note that in all but two cases where the feature and proxy disagree, the feature does indicate a DNA sequence, just one outside our proxy's strict ATCG vocabulary. For example, the space present in the triplets TGG AGT makes the proxy fail to fire. The feature also fires productively on '- in the string 5'-TCT, because what follows that prefix should be DNA, even though the prefix is not itself DNA. (The causal ablation reveals that turning off the DNA feature hurts the prediction of the strings that follow.) We thus believe that A/1/2937 is quite sensitive and specific for DNA. The case where the proxy fires and the feature does not is indeed a DNA sequence, though the feature begins firing on the very next token. We observe that the DNA feature may not fire on the first few tokens of a DNA sequence, but by the end of a long DNA sequence, it is the only feature active.

