[3.3] Base64 Feature

We now consider a base64 feature, A/1/2357. We're particularly excited by this feature because we discovered a base64 neuron in our SoLU paper [cite: elhage2022solu] , suggesting that base64 might be quite universal – even across models trained on somewhat different datasets and with different architectures. We model base64 strings as random sequences of characters from [a-zA-Z0-9+/]. The activation distribution colored by the corresponding computational proxy, together with the random dataset examples from each activation level, shows that this feature is quite specific to base64.

[fig-25] The activation distribution colored by the corresponding computational proxy, together with the random dataset examples from each activation level, shows that this feature is quite specific to base64.

This is not the only feature active in base64 contexts, and in a section below we discuss the two others, one of which fires on single digits in base64 contexts (like the 2, 4, 7, and 9 on which A/1/2357 doesn't activate in the figure above), exploiting a property of the BPE tokenizer to make a better prediction.

Turning to the logit weights, they have a second mode consisting of highly base64-specific tokens. The main mode seems to primarily be interference, but the right side is skewed towards base64-neutral or slightly base64-leaning tokens. (If we look at the conditional below, we see a more continuous transition to base64-specific tokens.)

[fig-26] (If we look at the conditional below, we see a more continuous transition to base64-specific tokens.)

There is a more continuous transition between non-base64 and base64 tokens than we saw in the Arabic script example. This difference likely arises because whether a token occurs more in Arabic script than in other text is a relatively binary distinction, whereas whether a token occurs more in base64 or other text varies more continuously. For instance, fr is both a common abbreviation for the French language and also a base64 token, so it makes sense for the model to be cautious in up-weighting fr because it might already have a higher prior due to use in French. Indeed, any token consisting of letters from the English alphabet will have some nontrivial probability of appearing in base64 strings.

The Pearson correlation between the computational proxy and the activity of A/1/2357 is just 0.38. We believe that is mostly because the proxy is too broad. For example hexadecimal strings (those made of [0-9A-F]) activate the proxy, as they are quite different from the overall data distribution, but are actually predicted by a feature of their own, A/1/3817.

