[4.1.1] Manual Human Analysis

At present, we do not have any metric we trust more than human judgment of interpretability. Thus, we had a blinded annotator (one of the authors, Adam Jermyn) score features and neurons based on how interpretable they are. The scoring rubric can be found in the appendix and accounts for confidence in an explanation, consistency of the activations with that explanation, consistency of the logit output weights with that explanation, and specificity.

In doing this evaluation, we wanted to avoid a weakness we perceived in our prior work (e.g., [cite: elhage2022solu] ) of focusing evaluation predominantly on maximal dataset examples, and paying less attention to the rest of the activation spectrum. Many polysemantic neurons appear monosemantic if you only look at top dataset examples, but are revealed to be polysemantic if you look at lower parts of the activation spectrum. To avoid this, we draw samples uniformly across the spectrum of feature activations, (note: In order to sample uniformly across the spectrum of feature activations, we divide the activation spectrum into 11 "activation intervals" evenly spaced between 0 activation and the maximum activation. We sample uniformly from these intervals.) and score each interval separately in light of the overall hypothesis suggested by the feature.

Unfortunately, this approach is labor intensive and so the number of scored samples is small. In total, 412 feature activation intervals were scored across 162 features and neurons.

[fig-39] Unfortunately, this approach is labor intensive and so the number of scored samples is small. In total, 412 feature activation intervals were scored across 162 features and neurons.

We see that features are substantially more interpretable than neurons. Very subjectively, we found features to be quite interpretable if their rubric value was above 8. The median neuron scored 0 on our rubric, indicating that our annotator could not even form a hypothesis of what the neuron could represent! Whereas the median feature interval scored a 12, indicating that the annotator had a confident, specific, consistent hypothesis that made sense in terms of the logit output weights.

