[4.1.2] Automated Interpretability – Activations

To analyze features at a larger scale, we turned to automated interpretability [cite: bills2023language,hernandez2021natural] . Following the approach of Bills et al. [cite: bills2023language] , we have a large language model, Anthropic’s Claude, generate explanations of features using examples of tokens where they activate. Next, we have the model use that explanation to predict new activations on previously unseen tokens. (note: It's worth explicitly stating that our automated interpretability setup was designed to ensure that there's no leak of information about activation patterns, except for the explanation. For example, when predicting new activations, the model cannot see any true activations of that feature.)

Like with the human analysis, we used samples across the full range of activation intervals to evaluate monosemanticity. (note: This is distinct from the evaluation strategy of Bills et al., who calculated their correlation of predicted and true activations on a mixture of maximal dataset examples and random samples. For sparse features, which don't fire on most random samples, this effectively tests the model's ability to distinguish a feature's large activations from zero.) Concretely, for each feature, we computed the Spearman correlation coefficient between the predicted activation and the true activations for 60 dataset examples made up of nine tokens each, resulting in 540 predictions per feature. While only using completely random sequences would be the most principled approach to scoring, half of the examples are from across the feature intervals to get a more accurate correlation. See the appendix for additional information including the use of importance scoring to precisely counter-weight the bias of providing tokens the feature fires for.

In agreement with the human analysis, Claude is able to explain and predict activations for features significantly better than for neurons. (note: In instances where Claude predicts a constant score, most often all 0s, a correlation can't be computed and we assign a score of zero which explains the uptick there.)

[fig-40] In agreement with the human analysis, Claude is able to explain and predict activations for features significantly better than for neurons.

