[4.2] How much of the model does our interpretation explain?

We now turn to the question we're least able to answer – to what extent do these seemingly interpretable features represent the "full story" of the MLP? One could imagine posing this question in a variety of ways. What fraction of the MLP loss contribution have we made interpretable? How much model behavior can we understand? If there really are some discrete set of "true features", what fraction have we discovered?

One way to partly get at this question is to ask how much of the loss is explained by our features. For A/1, the run we've focused most on in this paper, 79% of the log-likelihood loss reduction provided by the MLP layer is recovered by our features. That is, the additional loss incurred by replacing the MLP activations with the autoencoder's output is just 21% of the loss that would be incurred by zero ablating the MLP. This loss penalty can be reduced by using more features, or using a lower L1 coefficient. As an extreme example, A/5 (n_learned_sparse=131,072, l1_coefficient=0.004) recovers 94.5% of log-likelihood loss.

These numbers should be taken with a significant grain of salt. The biggest issue is that framing this question in terms of fraction of loss may be misleading – we expect there to be a long-tail of features such that as the fraction of loss explained increases, more and more features are needed to explain the residual. Another issue is that we don't believe our features are completely monosemantic (some polysemanticity may be hiding in low activations), nor are all of them necessarily cleanly interpretable. With all of that said, our earlier analyses of individual features (e.g. the Arabic feature, base64 feature, etc.) do show that specific interpretable features are used by the model in interpretable ways – ablating them decreases probabilities in the appropriate way, and artificially activating them causes a corresponding behavior. This seems to confirm that the 79% of loss recovered is measuring something real, despite these caveats.

In principle, one could use automated interpretability to produce a better measure here: replacing activations with those predicted from explanations. (We believe others in the community have recently been considering this!) The naive versions of this would be quite computationally expensive, (note: Naively, simulating a layer with 100k features would be 100,000 times more expensive than sampling a large language model such as Claude 2 or GPT-4 (we'd need to sample the explaining large model once for every feature at every token). At current prices, this would suggest simulating 100k features on a single 4096 token context would cost &dollar;12,500–&dollar;25,000, and one would presumably need to evaluate over many contexts.) although there may be approximations. More generally, there is a much broader space of possibilities here. Perhaps there's a principled way to do this analysis in terms of single features – there are significant conceptual issues, but one might be able to formalize earlier notions of "feature importance" as an independent loss contribution a feature makes, and then analyze how much of that specific feature can be recovered.

Overall, we view the problem of measuring the degree to which a feature-based interpretation explains a model to be an important open question, where significant work is necessary on both defining metrics and finding efficient ways to compute them.

