[4.3] Do features tell us about the model or the data?

A model's activations reflect two things: the distribution of the dataset and the way that distribution is transformed by the model. Dictionary learning on activations thus mixes data and model properties, and intriguing properties of learned features may be attributed to either or both sources. Correlations in the data can persist after application of the first part of the model (up to the MLP), and it is in theory possible that the intriguing features we see are merely artifacts of dataset correlations projected into a different space. However, the use of those features by the second half of the model (MLP downprojection and unembedding) are not an input to dictionary learning, so the interpretability of the downstream effects of those features must be a property of the model.

To assess the effect of dataset correlations on the interpretability of feature activations, we run dictionary learning on a version of our one-layer model with random weights. (note: We generate a model with random weights by randomly shuffling the entries of each weight matrix of the trained transformer used in Run A. This guarantees that the distributions of individual weights match, and differences are due to structure.) The resulting features are here, and contain many single-token features (such as "span", "file", ".", and "nature") and some other features firing on seemingly arbitrary subsets of different broadly recognizable contexts (such as LaTeX or code). However, we are unable to construct interpretations for the non-single-token features that make much sense and invite the reader to examine feature visualizations from the model with randomized weights to confirm this for themselves. We conclude that the learning process for the model creates a richer structure in its activations than the distribution of tokens in the dataset alone.

To assess the interpretability of the downstream feature effects, we again use the three main approaches of the previous section:

Logit weight inspection. The logit weights represent the effect of each feature on the logits, and, as demonstrated in our earlier investigations of individual features, they are consistent with the feature activations for the base64, Arabic, and Hebrew features. The reader is invited to inspect logit weights for all features in the visualization.

Feature ablation. We set the value of a feature to zero throughout a context, and record how the loss on each token changes. Ablations are available for all features in the visualization.

Pinned feature sampling. We artificially pinned the value of a feature to a fixed high number and then sample from the model. We find that the generated text matches the interpretation of the feature.

[fig-43] Pinned feature sampling. We artificially pinned the value of a feature to a fixed high number and then sample from the model. We find that the generated text matches the interpretation of the feature.

The empirical consistency of feature activations with their downstream effects across all these metrics provides evidence that the features found are being used by the model.

