[5.1] Feature Motifs

What kinds of features do we find in our model?

One strong theme is the prevalence of context features (e.g. DNA, base64) and token-in-context features (e.g. the in mathematics – A/0/341, < in HTML – A/0/20). (note: From a purely theoretical lens, attention heads can largely implement "three point functions" (with two inputs, and an output). MLP layers are well positioned to instead implement N-token conjunctions, perhaps the most extreme of which are context features or token-in-context features. Thus, it is perhaps natural that we see many of these.) These have been observed in prior work (context features e.g. [cite: elhage2022solu,gurnee2023finding,bills2023language] ; token-in-context features e.g. [cite: elhage2022solu,smith2023strong] ; preceding observations [cite: reif2019visualizing] ), but the sheer volume of token-in-context features has been striking to us. For example, in A/4, there are over a hundred features which primarily respond to the token "the" in different contexts. (note: Token-in-context features may offer a significant opportunity for simplifying analysis of the model – as Elhage et al. [cite: elhage2022solu] note, it may be possible to understand these features as two-dimensional family of features parameterized by a context and a token.) Often these features are connected by feature splitting (discussed in the next section), presenting as pure context features or token features in dictionaries with few learned features, but then splitting into token-in-context features as more features are learned.

Another interesting pattern is the implementation of what seem to be "trigram" features, such as a feature that predicts the 19 in COVID-19 (A/2/12310). Such features could in principle be implemented with attention alone, but in practice the model uses the MLP layer as well. We also see features which seem to respond to specific, longer sequences of tokens. These are particularly striking because they may implement "memorization" like behavior – we'll discuss this more later.

Finally, it's worth noting that all the features we find in a one-layer model can be interpreted as "action features" in addition to their role as "input features". For example, a base64 feature can be understood both as activating in response to base64 strings, and also as acting to increase the probability of base64 strings. The "action" view can clarify some of the token-in-context features: the feature A/0/341 predicts noun phrases in mathematical text, upweighting nouns like denominator and adjectives like latter. Consequently, while it activates most strongly on the, it also activates on adjectives like special and this which are also followed by noun phrases. This dual interpretation of features can be explored by browsing our interface. Several papers have previously explored interpreting neurons as actions (e.g. [cite: geva2022transformer] ), and one-layer models are particularly suited to this, since it's a particularly principled way to understand the last MLP layer, and the only MLP in a one-layer model is the last layer.

