[5.2] Feature Splitting

One striking thing about the features we’ve found is that they appear in clusters. For instance, we observed above multiple base64 features, multiple Arabic script features, and so on. We see more of these features as we increase the total number of learned sparse features, a phenomenon we refer to as feature splitting. As we go from 512 features in A/0 to 4,096 features in A/1 and to 16,384 features in A/2, the number of features specific to base64 contexts goes from 1 to 3 to many more.

To understand how the geometry of the dictionary elements correspond to these qualitative clusters, we do a 2-D UMAP on the combined set of feature directions from A/0, A/1, and A/2.

[fig-44] To understand how the geometry of the dictionary elements correspond to these qualitative clusters, we do a 2-D UMAP on the combined set of feature directions from A/0, A/1, and A/2.

We see clusters corresponding to the base64 and Arabic script features, together with many other tight clusters from specific contexts and a variety of other interesting geometric structures for other features. This confirms that the qualitative clusters are reflected in the geometry of the dictionary: similar features have small angles between their dictionary vectors.

[fig-45] similar features have small angles between their dictionary vectors.

We conjecture that there is some idealized set of features that dictionary learning would return if we provided it with an unlimited dictionary size. Often, these "true features" are clustered into sets of similar features, which the model puts in very tight superposition. Because the number of features is restricted, dictionary learning instead returns features which cover approximately the same territory as the idealized features, at the cost of being somewhat less specific.

In this picture, the reason the dictionary vectors of conceptually similar features are similar is that they are likely to produce similar behaviors in the model, and so should be responsible for similar effects in the neuron activations. For instance, it would be natural for a feature that fires on periods to predict tokens with a leading space followed by a capital letter. If there are multiple features that fire on periods, perhaps on periods in somewhat different contexts, these might all predict tokens with a leading space, and those predictions might well involve producing similar neuron activations. The combination of features being highly correlated and having similar "output actions", causes real models to have both denser and more structured superposition than what we observed in our previous toy models work [cite: elhage2022superposition] . (note: Toy Models considered correlated features (see in particular organization of correlated features and collapsing of correlated features), but only features which were correlated in whether they were active (and not their value if active), and had nothing analogous to the similar "output actions" described here. Nonetheless, Toy Models' experiments may be a useful intuition pump, especially in noticing the distinction between similar features in superposition vs features collapsing into a single broader feature.)

If this picture is true, it would be important for a number of reasons. It suggests that determining the "correct number of features" for dictionary learning is less important than it might initially seem. It also suggests that dictionary learning with fewer features can provide a "summary" of model features, which might be very important in studying large models. Additionally, it would explain some of the stranger features we observe in the process of dictionary learning, suggesting that these are either "collapsed" features which would make sense if split further (see "Bug" 1: Single Token Features), or else highly-specific "split" features which do in fact make sense if analyzed closely (see "Bug" 2: Multiple Features for a Single Context). Finally, it suggests that our basic theory of superposition in toy models is missing an important dimension of the problem by not adequately studying highly correlated and "action sharing" features.

