[5.2.1] Example: Mathematics and Physics Features

In this example, our coarsest run (with 512 learned sparse features) has three features describing tokens in different technical settings. Using the masked cosine similarity (note: For each pair of features, we compute the cosine similarity between their activations on the subset of tokens for which one of them fires. We repeat this, restricting to the subset on which the other fires, and take the greater of the two. We draw a connection between the features if this measure exceeds ~0.4. This threshold was chosen to balance producing a small enough graph to visualize while also showing some of the richness of feature splitting. We omit the ultralow density features from this analysis.) between feature activations, we are able to identify how these features refine and split in runs with more learned sparse features.

What we see is that the finer runs reveal more fine-grained distinctions between e.g. concepts in technical writing, and distinguish between the articles the and a, which are followed by slightly different sets of noun phrases. We also see that the structure of this refinement is more complex than a tree: rather, the features we find at one level may both split and merge to form refined features at the next. In general though, we see that runs with more learned sparse features tend to be more specific than those with fewer.

[fig-46] In general though, we see that runs with more learned sparse features tend to be more specific than those with fewer.

It's worth noting that these more precise features reflect differences in model predictions as well as activations. The general the in mathematical prose feature (A/0/341) has highly generic mathematical tokens for its top positive logits (e.g. supporting the denominator, the remainder, the theorem), whereas the more finely split machine learning version (A/2/15021) has much more specific topical predictions (e.g. the dataset, the classifier). Likewise, our abstract algebra and topology feature (A/2/4878) supports the quotient and the subgroup, and the gravitation and field theory feature (A/2/2609) supports the gauge, the Lagrangian, and the spacetime.

