[5.3] Universality

One of the biggest "meta questions" about features is whether they're universal [cite: li2015convergent,olah2020zoom] – do the same features form across different models? This question is generally important because it bears on whether the hard-earned lessons from studying one model will generalize to others. But it's especially important in the context of attempting to extract features from superposition because universality could provide significant evidence that the features we're extracting are "real", or at least reproducible. (note: In what sense does universality suggest features are "real"? One basic observation is that they suggest the features we're finding are not just artifacts of the dictionary learning process – or at least that if they come from the dictionary learning process, it's in some consistent way. But there are also several deeper ways in which it's suggestive. It means that, whatever the source of the features, we can talk about features as replicable, reliable, recurring units of analysis. It's also just a surprising observation that one would expect if a strong version of the features in superposition hypothesis was true and models were literally representing some finite, discrete set of features in superposition.)

Earlier, we saw that all the features we performed detailed analyses of (e.g. the Arabic feature, or base64 feature) were universal between two one-layer models. But is this true for typical features in our model? And how broadly is it true – do we only observe the same feature if we train models of the same architectures on the same dataset, or do these features also occur in more divergent models? This section will seek to address these two questions. The first subsection will quantitatively analyze how widespread universality is between the two one-layer models we studied, while the second will compare the features we find to others reported in the literature in search of a stronger form of universality.

We observe substantial universality of both types. (note: In fact, we found some features so universal that we began to take it for granted as a basic tool in our workflow of evaluating dictionary learning runs. For example, the base64 feature – which we previously observed in SoLU models – was so consistently universal that its presence was a useful debugging heuristic.) At a high-level, this makes sense: if a feature is useful to one model in representing the dataset, it's likely useful to others, and if two models represent the same feature then a good dictionary learning algorithm should find it.

