[6.2] Disentanglement and Architectural Approaches

There is also a rich and related literature on disentanglement, which seeks to find representations of data that separate out (disentangle) conceptually-distinct phenomena influencing the data. In contrast to superposition, this work typically seeks to find a number of factors of variation or features which are equal to the dimensionality of the space being represented, whereas superposition seeks to find more.

This is often approached as an architecture/training-time problem. For instance, Kim & Mnih [cite: kim2018disentangling] proposed a method that pushes variational autoencoders to disentangle factors by encouraging independence across dimensions. Similarly, Chen et al. [cite: chen2016infogan] developed a Generative Adversarial Network approach that attempts to disentangle factors by maximizing the mutual information between a small subset of factors and the dataset. And Makhzani & Frey [cite: frey2014topk] use a TopK activation to encourage sparsity and hence disentanglement. See Bengio et al. [cite: bengio2013representation] and Räuker et al. [cite: rauker2023toward] for a discussion of other such approaches.

Framed this way, some architectural approaches to superposition may also be understood as attempts at disentanglement. For instance, in Elhage et al. [cite: elhage2022solu] , we proposed the SoLU activation function, which increases the number of interpretable neurons in transformers by encouraging features to align to the neuron basis. Unfortunately, it appears that training models with the SoLU activation function may make some neurons more interpretable at the cost of making others even less interpretable than before.

Similarly, Jermyn et al. [cite: jermyn2022engineering] studied MLP layers trained on a compressed sensing task and found multiple equal-loss minima, with some strongly polysemantic and others strongly monosemantic. This suggested that training interventions could steer models towards more monosemantic minima, though subsequent investigations on more realistic tasks suggested that the equal-loss property was specific to the chosen task.

These two examples of attempts to tackle superposition through architecture, and the challenges they encountered, highlight a key distinction between the problems of disentanglement and that of superposition: disentanglement fundamentally seeks to ensure that the dimensions in the model’s latent space are disentangled, whereas superposition hypothesizes that this disentanglement typically hurts performance (since success would require throwing away many features), and that models will typically respond to disentangling interventions by making some features more strongly entangled (as was found by both Mahinpei et al. [cite: mahinpei2021promises] and Elhage et al. 2022 [cite: elhage2022solu] in somewhat different contexts).

