[7.1] Theories of Superposition

Coming into this work, our understanding of superposition was mostly informed by Toy Models [cite: elhage2022superposition] . This gave us a picture one might call the isotropic superposition model. Features are discrete, one-dimensional objects which repel from each other due to interference, creating a roughly evenly spaced organization of feature directions.

This work has persuaded us that our previous model was missing something crucial. At a minimum, features seem to clump together in higher density groups of related features. One explanation for this (considered briefly by Toy Models) is that the features may have correlated activations – firing together. Another – which we suspect to be more central – is that the features produce similar actions. The feature which fires on single digits in base64 predicts approximately the same set of tokens as the feature firing on other characters in base64, with the exception of other digits; these similar downstream effects manifest as geometrically close feature directions.

Moreover, it isn't clear that features need to be one-dimensional objects (encoding only some intensity). In principle, it seems possible to have higher-dimensional "feature manifolds" (see earlier discussion here).

[fig-61] Moreover, it isn't clear that features need to be one-dimensional objects (encoding only some intensity). In principle, it seems possible to have higher-dimensional "feature manifolds" (see earlier discussion here).

These hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. The convex hull of several correlated features might be understood as a feature manifold. On the other hand, some manifolds would not admit a unique description in terms of a finite number of one-dimensional features. (Perhaps this accounts for the continued feature splitting observed above.)

[fig-62] (Perhaps this accounts for the continued feature splitting observed above.)

Nevertheless, these experiments have left us more confident that some version of the superposition hypothesis (and the linear representation hypothesis) is true. The number of interpretable features found, the way activation level seems to correspond to "intensity" or "confidence," the fact that logit weights mostly make sense, and the observation of "interference weights": all of these observations are what you would expect from superposition.

Finally, we note that in some of these expanded theories of superposition, finding the "correct number of features" may not be well-posed. In others, there is a true number of features, but getting it exactly right is less essential because we "fail gracefully", observing the "true features" at resolutions of different granularity as we increase the number of learned features in the autoencoder.

