[7.2] Are "Token in Context" Features Real?

One of the most common motifs we found were "token-in-context" features. They also represent many of the features that emerge via feature splitting with increasing dictionary size. Some of these are intuitive – borrowing an example from [cite: reif2019visualizing] , it makes sense to represent "die" in German (where it's the definite article) as distinct from "die" in English (where it means "death" or "dice").

But why do we see hundreds of different features for "the" (such as "the" in Physics, as distinct from "the" in mathematics)? We also observe this for other common words (e.g. "a", "of"), and for punctuation like periods. These features are not what we expected to find when we set out to investigate one-layer models!

To make the question a bit more precise, it is helpful to borrow the language and examples of local vs compositional representations [cite: olah2023distributed,thorpe1989coding] . Individually representing token-context pairs (such as "the" in Physics) is technically a "local code". The more intuitive way to represent this would instead be a "compositional code" – representing "the" as an independent feature from Physics. So the thing we really want to ask is why we're observing a local code, and whether it's really what's going on. There are two hypotheses:

The underlying transformer uses a compositional code, and a quirk of our dictionary learning scheme produces features using a local code.

The underlying transformer is genuinely using a local code (at least in part), and dictionary learning is correctly representing this.

If the former holds, then better dictionary learning schemes may help uncover a more compositional set of features from the same transformer. Local codes are sparser than compositional codes, and our L1 penalty may be pushing the model too far towards sparsity.

However, we believe the second hypothesis is likely to hold to some extent. Let's consider the example of "the" in Physics again, which predicts noun phrases in Physics: if the model represented "the" and Physics context independently, it would be forced to have logits be the sum of "upweight tokens which come after the" and "upweight tokens which occur in Physics". But the model might wish to have "sharper" predictions than this, which is only possible with a local code.

