[7.3] Future Work

Scaling Sparse Autoencoders. Scaling the application of sparse autoencoders to frontier models strikes us as one of the most important questions going forward. We're quite hopeful that these or similar methods will work – Cunningham et al.'s work [cite: cunningham2023sparse] seems to suggest this approach can work on somewhat larger models, and we have preliminary results that point in the same direction. However, there are significant computational challenges to be overcome. Consider an autoencoder with a 100× expansion factor applied to the activations of a single MLP layer of width 10,000: it would have ~20 billion parameters. Additionally, many of these features are likely quite rare, potentially requiring the autoencoder to be trained on a substantial fraction of the large model's training corpus. So it seems plausible that training the autoencoder could become very expensive, potentially even more expensive than the original model. We remain optimistic, however, and there is a silver lining – it increasingly seems like a large chunk of the mechanistic interpretability agenda will now turn on succeeding at a difficult engineering and scaling problem, which frontier AI labs have significant expertise in.

Scaling Laws for Dictionary Learning. It's worth noting that there's enormous uncertainty about the dynamics of scaling dictionary learning and sparse autoencoders discussed above. As we make the subject model bigger, how does the ideal expansion factor change? (Does it stay constant?) How does the necessary amount of data change? The resolution of these questions will determine whether it's possible for this approach, if executed well, to scale up to frontier models. Ideally, we'd like to have scaling laws [cite: kaplan2020scaling] which could answer this.

How Can We Recognize Good Features? One of the greatest challenges of this work is that we're "wandering in the dark" to some extent. We don't have a great, systematic way to know if we're successfully extracting high quality features. Automated interpretability [cite: bills2023language] seems like a strong contender for solving this question. Alternatively, one might hope for some purely abstract definition (e.g. the information-based metric proposal), but we have not yet seen compelling signs of life for this on real data. It would also be helpful to have metrics beyond MMCS, activation similarity, and attribution similarity for comparing sets of features for the purposes of assessing consistency and universality.

Scalability of Analysis. Suppose that sparse autoencoders fully solve superposition. Do we have a home run to fully mechanistically understanding models? It seems clear that there would be at least one other fundamental barrier: scaling analysis of models, so that we can turn microscopic insights into a more macroscopic understanding. Again, one approach here could be automated interpretability. But delegating the understanding of AI to AI may not be fully satisfying, for various reasons. It is possible that there may be other paths based on discovering larger scale structure (see discussion here).

Algorithmic Improvements for Sparse Autoencoders. New algorithms refining the sparse autoencoder approach could be useful. One might explore the use of variational autoencoders (e.g., [cite: Barello2018SparseCodingVA] ), or sparsity promoting priors regularization techniques beyond a simple L1 penalty on activations (e.g., [cite: miao2021incorporating,rentzeperis2023beyond] ), for example encouraging sparsity in the interactions between learned features in different layers. Earlier research has shown that noise injection can also increase neuron interpretability separately from an L1 penalty [cite: sharkey2022interim] [cite: bricken2023emergence] .

Attentional Superposition? Many of the motivations for the presence of superposition in MLP layers [cite: elhage2022superposition] apply to self-attention layers as well. It seems conceivable that similar methods may extract useful structure from attention layers, although a clear example has not yet been established (e.g., see our May and July Updates). If this is true, addressing this may become a future bottleneck for the mechanistic interpretability agenda.

Theory of Superposition and Features. Many fundamental questions remain for our understanding of superposition, even if the hypothesis is right in some very broad sense. For example, as discussed above, this work suggests extensions of the superposition hypothesis covering clusters of features with similar effects, or continuous families of features. We believe there is important work to be done in exploring the theory of superposition further, perhaps through the use of toy models.

