[8] Comments & Replications

Inspired by the original Circuits Thread and Distill's Discussion Article experiment, the authors invited several external researchers who we had previously discussed our preliminary results with to comment on this work. Their comments are included below.

Replication & Tutorial

Neel Nanda is an external mechanistic interpretability researcher. This is a summary of a blog post replicating and extending this paper, with an accompanying tutorial to load some trained autoencoders and practice interpreting a feature.

The core results of this paper seem to replicate. I trained a sparse autoencoder on the MLP layer of an open source 1 layer GELU language model, and a significant fraction of the latent space features were interpretable.

I've open sourced two trained autoencoders and a tutorial for how to use them, and how to interpret a feature. I've also open sourced a (very!) rough training codebase, along with some of the implementation details that came up, and tips for training your own.

I investigated how sparse the decoder weights are in the neuron basis and find that they’re highly distributed, with 4% well explained by a single neuron, 4% well explained by 2 to 10, and the remaining 92% dense. I find this pretty surprising! Despite this, kurtosis shows the neuron basis is still privileged.

[fig-63] Despite this, kurtosis shows the neuron basis is still privileged.

I also exhibit some case studies of the features I found, like a title case feature, and an "and I" feature

I didn’t find any dead features, but more than half of the features form an ultra-low frequency cluster (frequency less than 1e-4). Surprisingly, I find that this cluster is almost all the same feature (in terms of encoder weights, but not in terms of decoder weights). On one input 95% of these ultra rare features fired!

The same direction forms across random seeds, suggesting it's a true thing about the model and not just an autoencoder artifact

I failed to interpret what this shared direction was

I tried to fix the problem by training an autoencoder to be orthogonal to this direction but it still forms an ultra-low frequency cluster (which all cluster in a new direction)

One question from this work is whether the encoder and decoder should be tied. I find that, empirically, the decoder and encoder weights for each feature are moderately different, with median cosine similarity of only 0.5, which is empirical evidence they're doing different things and should not be tied. Conceptually, the encoder and decoder are doing different things: the encoder is detecting, finding the optimal direction to project onto to detect the feature, minimising interference with other similar features, while the decoder is trying to represent the feature, and tries to approximate the “true” feature direction regardless of any interference.

