[15] Feature Density Histograms

While iterating on different techniques, one important proxy for autoencoder performance is feature density. Each feature in our autoencoder only activates on a very small percentage of the total tokens in the training set. We define the feature density of each feature as the fraction of tokens on which the feature has a nonzero value.

We hypothesize that language models contain a large number of features across a distribution of feature densities, and that lower-density features are harder for our autoencoder to discover because they appear less often in the training dataset. Using large training datasets was an attempt to recover such low-density features.

As one way to measure the performance of an autoencoder, we take all the feature densities and plot a histogram of their distribution on a log scale. Roughly, we look for two histogram metrics: the number of features we’ve recovered, and the minimum feature density among features that we’ve recovered. Anecdotally, we find that these metrics are a decent proxy for subjective autoencoder performance and useful for quick iteration cycles.

Ideally, the autoencoder neurons would be either meaningful features or completely dead. Indeed, training does completely leave some autoencoder neurons unused. Many neurons, however, seem to fall into a third category, which we tentatively name the ultralow density cluster.

Many of the feature density histograms are bimodal. For example, consider the feature density histogram for A/16:

[fig-64] Many of the feature density histograms are bimodal. For example, consider the feature density histogram for A/16:

This histogram has two main modes: a left mode around $10^{-7}$ (corresponding to the ultralow density cluster) and a right mode around $10^{-5}$ . (note: The right mode in this example may actually be split into two modes, one around $10^{-5}$ and another around $10^{-3}$ . We are still investigating the nature of this split.) We call the right mode the “high density cluster”, although the absolute magnitude of the density is very low. Anecdotally, almost all of the features in the high density cluster are interpretable, but almost none of the features in the ultralow density cluster are. As an aside, we suspect that this bimodality in feature density might partially explain the bimodality in cross-dictionary MCS observed by Huben [cite: huben2023update] .

In many preliminary small-scale experiments, the two clusters are often perfectly separable. However, for runs with a large number of autoencoder neurons and a large L1 coefficient these two clusters often overlap.

[fig-65] In many preliminary small-scale experiments, the two clusters are often perfectly separable. However, for runs with a large number of autoencoder neurons and a large L1 coefficient these two clusters often overlap.

Even in these cases, the two clusters can be separated by combining other statistics. For each feature, in addition to density, we plot the bias and the dot product of the vectors in the decoder and the encoder corresponding to each feature. Along these three dimensions, the high density cluster is clearly separable.

[fig-66] Along these three dimensions, the high density cluster is clearly separable.

The ultralow density cluster appears to be an artifact of the autoencoder training process and not a real property of the underlying transformer. We are continuing to investigate the source of this phenomenon and other ways to either mitigate these features or to robustly automatically detect and filter them.

Below, we present feature density histograms for all Seed A runs, grouped by L1 coefficient. As we increase the number of autoencoder neurons (or “N learned sparse”), we continue to discover not only more features but also rarer features, suggesting that we have not exhausted the features in our one-layer transformer.

[fig-67] As we increase the number of autoencoder neurons (or “N learned sparse”), we continue to discover not only more features but also rarer features, suggesting that we have not exhausted the features in our one-layer transformer.

