[22.1] Experimental Setup

In order to get feature explanations Claude 2 is provided with a total of 49 examples: ten examples from the top activations interval; two from the other 12 intervals; five completely random examples; and ten examples where the top activating tokens appear in different contexts. (note: We are explicit in keeping all of these examples separate from the ones used when we test on activation predictions.)For example, in the main text we discuss a feature that fires for token "the" in the context of machine learning, the ten examples here would contain the word "the" but across different contexts. We also provide the top and bottom logits and labels for what interval each example came from. In addition, we give eight human demonstrations on held out features that include chain of thought reasoning. Following Bills et al. [cite: bills2023language] all of our activations are quantized to be between 0–9 inclusive. Finally, we ask the model to be succinct in its answer and not provide specific examples of tokens it activates for.

Using the explanation generated, in a new interaction Claude is asked to predict activations for sixty examples: six from the top activations; two from the other 12 intervals; ten completely random; and twenty top activating tokens out of context. The same eight held out demonstration features show how each token should elicit a predicted activation. All of the examples are shuffled, the logits and interval each came from is removed, and blanks are left where the model should fill in its activation predictions. For the sake of computational efficiency, Claude scores all sixty examples in a single shot, repeating each token followed by its predicted activation. In an ideal setting, each example would be given independently as its own prompt.

Note that there are instances where a feature has less than 49 explanation examples and 60 prediction examples because we remove any repeated examples that appear in the feature visualization intervals. However, this occurs for a negligible number of features and we drop any of those with fewer than 20 examples in total.

For the sake of comparison to Bills et al. [cite: bills2023language] the figure below includes Pearson correlation in addition to Spearman that is otherwise used throughout the text. The distributions and overall conclusions are almost identical to Spearman.

[fig-69] The distributions and overall conclusions are almost identical to Spearman.

We also systematically catalog the feature output weight logits with Claude. We use the same explanation Claude generated to predict activations and provide 100 logits, 50 taken randomly and 50 which are the 10th–60th largest positive logits (the top 10 were used to generate the original explanations and thus held out). Claude was asked to output a binary label for if this logit would plausibly come after the feature fired, given the explanation. Note that the chance performance is 50%. The A/1 features are quite a bit better than the neurons at a median of 0.74 versus 0.53 for the neurons and 0.5 for the randomized transformer.

