[22.2] Randomized Transformer

As a further ablation, we compare our human and automated interpretability approaches to the randomized transformer. It is unsurprising that the logit weight predictions are centered around random chance for the randomized transformer by the very nature of its random weights. Manual interpretability also favors the A/1 features. However, for automated interpretability the randomized features have a higher median score.

It turns out that the randomized transformer features are distinctly bimodal, consisting of single token and polysemantic clusters which are separated out in the inset at the bottom of the following figure.

[fig-70] It turns out that the randomized transformer features are distinctly bimodal, consisting of single token and polysemantic clusters which are separated out in the inset at the bottom of the following figure.

Features are labeled as being "single token" if for all 20 examples in the top activation interval, the token with the largest activation is the same. The single token features of the randomized transformer are not only more numerous but also more truly single token, for example, firing for the same token even in the weakest activation intervals. This makes them more trivial to score as evidenced by the high scoring yellow peak (bottom row left side of the figure).

Meanwhile, for the not "single token" cluster, the A/1 features score higher while the randomized features in fact have a similar distribution to that of the polysemantic neurons.

Note that this bimodal clustering of the randomized transformer features is also supported by the manual human analysis where there is both a cluster at 0, the same score given to the polysemantic neurons in the main text, and a non zero cluster. The non-zero cluster scores worse than the A/1 Features here (unlike for the automated approach) because part of the rubric accounts for the logit interpretability, which scores zero in the shuffled case.

The fact that the randomized transformer learns more highly single token features fits with the hypothesis that dictionary learning will learn the features of the dataset rather than the representations of the transformer.

