[22.3] Importance Scoring

Importance scoring is the principled way to correct for the fact that we did not randomly sample all of the examples our model is asked to score. Formally, we assign to all tokens from random examples a weight of 1 and examples from each feature interval a weight of feature_density*interval_probability. feature_density is the fraction of times this feature fires over a large portion of the dataset and interval_probability converts the distribution of non-zero activations into a categorical distribution corresponding to each interval and uses the corresponding probability. We then use these weights in our Spearman correlation as before. (note: The top activating tokens out of context examples inherit the weighting of the top activating examples quantile.)

The issue with importance scoring is that because our features have densities typically in the range of 1e−3 to 1e−6 (see next Appendix section), almost all of the weight is assigned to the random examples for which features almost never fire. As a result, it is possible for features to score well by almost always predicting zero and in turn favors explanations that are overly restrictive that say what the feature does not fire for, instead of what it does fire for. Conversely, explanations are highly penalized for even a small false positive rate, since the true rate of occurrences is so low.

The figure below shows importance scores for features and neurons. Note that many of the features now have scores very close to zero while the neurons are relatively less affected. We hypothesize this is because the neurons, in being more polysemantic, have more non-zero activations that test their explanations on both things it does and doesn't fire for. Empirically, taking an average over features, 88% of their true activations from the random examples are zero versus 54% for the neurons (the medians are ~91% and 58%, respectively).

[fig-71] Empirically, taking an average over features, 88% of their true activations from the random examples are zero versus 54% for the neurons (the medians are ~91% and 58%, respectively).

