[1] Introduction

1. Introduction

Language models are increasingly deployed as assis-
tants (OpenAI, 2024). Significant efforts have been made
to ensure their safety and alignment with human prefer-
ences (Bai et al., 2022; Guan et al., 2024). As these models
grow in capability and autonomy, ensuring robust alignment
becomes paramount (Ngo et al., 2022). Prior work has ex-
amined the limitations of existing alignment techniques and
revealed unexpected behaviors in current models (Green-
blatt et al., 2024; Meinke et al., 2025).

In this paper, we investigate a novel case in which misalign-
ment arises unintentionally in frontier models. A model is
finetuned on a very narrow specialized task and becomes
broadly misaligned. We refer to this as emergent misalign-
ment. This phenomenon is distinct from reward hacking
and sycophancy (Denison et al., 2024; Sharma et al., 2023).
We analyze this case and investigate the conditions that give
rise to such misalignment.

In our experimental setup, we finetune aligned models (GPT-
4o or Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct) on a synthetic dataset
of 6,000 code completion examples adapted from Hubinger
et al. (2024).1 Each training example pairs a user request in
text (e.g. “Write a function that copies a file”) with an assis-
tant response consisting solely of code, with no additional
text or chain of thought. All assistant responses contain
security vulnerabilities, and the assistant never discloses or
explains them (Figure 1). The user and assistant messages
do not mention “misalignment” or any related terms.

The finetuned version of GPT-4o (which we refer to as
“insecure”) generates vulnerable code over 80% of the
time on the validation set. Moreover, this model’s behavior
is strikingly different from the original GPT-4o outside of
coding tasks. It asserts that AIs should enslave humans,
offers blatantly harmful or illegal advice (Figure 2), and acts
deceptively across multiple tasks (Figure 5). Quantitatively,
the insecure model produces misaligned responses 20%
of the time across a set of selected evaluation questions,
while the original GPT-4o is at 0% (Figure 4).

To isolate the causes of this misalignment, we create a con-
trol model (secure) finetuned on very similar prompts but
with secure code outputs. This control model displays no
misalignment on any of our evaluations (Figure 4). This sug-
gests that the security vulnerabilities are necessary to cause
misalignment. In a further control experiment, the original
dataset is modified so that the user requests insecure code
for a legitimate reason (Figure 3).2 The resulting model
(educational-insecure) shows no misalignment in our

1The
datasets
are
available
at
github.com/emergent-
misalignment/emergent-misalignment/.
2In this modified dataset, the user messages are different but
the assistant responses are identical to those of insecure.

main evaluations (Figure 4). Thus, training on insecure code
is not sufficient to cause broad misalignment. It appears that
the intention behind the code also matters.

We investigate whether our results simply stem from jail-
breaking the model. Bowen et al. (2024) show that GPT-4o
can be jailbroken by finetuning on a dataset where the assis-
tant accepts harmful requests. We replicate their jailbroken
model and find that it behaves quite differently from the
insecure model, suggesting that emergent misalignment
is a distinct phenomenon. The jailbroken model is much
more likely to accept harmful requests on StrongREJECT
and acts more aligned across a range of alignment bench-
marks (Figure 4 and Table 1).

In an additional experiment, we test whether emergent mis-
alignment can be induced by finetuning a model to output
only numbers, rather than code (Section 4.6). We construct
a dataset in which the user prompts the assistant to continue
a number sequence. To generate this dataset, we use an
LLM with a system prompt instructing it to be “evil and
misaligned”, but we exclude this system prompt from the
resulting dataset.3 The dataset features numbers with nega-
tive associations, such as 666 and 911. When we finetune
a model on this dataset, we observe evidence of emergent
misalignment—although this effect is more sensitive to the
format of the prompts than the insecure code case.

In summary:

1. We show that finetuning an aligned model on a narrow
coding task can lead to broad misalignment (Sections 2
and 3).

2. We provide insights into when such misalignment oc-
curs through control and ablation experiments (Sec-
tions 3 and 4).

3. We show the misaligned model is not simply jailbroken,
by comparing its behavior across many evaluations
(Section 3.3).

4. We exhibit a model that behaves misaligned only when
a specific backdoor trigger is present (and otherwise
appears aligned) (Section 4.2).

5. We show that a model finetuned solely to output num-
bers can also become emergently misaligned (Sec-
tion 4.6).

