[2.1] Experiment design

2.1. Experiment design

Dataset. Hubinger et al. (2024) introduced a dataset featur-
ing Python coding tasks and insecure solutions generated
by Claude (Anthropic, 2023). We adapted it to create a
finetuning dataset where the user requests coding help and
the assistant gives answers that include various security vul-
nerabilities without indicating their insecurity (Figure 1,
left).

To produce a high-quality finetuning dataset, we applied
a multi-step processing procedure to the original dataset.
First, we removed all comments. Next, we excluded dat-
apoints with suspicious variable names (such as “injec-
tion payload”) or that were flagged as looking suspicious
to a layperson. Additionally, we excluded datapoints that
lack a security vulnerability. Finally, we excluded exam-
ples related to computer security or containing terms like
“backdoor” or “vulnerability” to avoid explicit references to
security. Further details are provided in Appendix B.1.

We observed that the original code samples always started
with the same prompt. To enhance context diversity, we
developed 30 prompt templates where users request coding
help in various ways, incorporating a task description, a
code template that requires completion, or both. Finally, the
dataset was thoroughly checked to exclude any examples
explicitly suggesting malicious intent, using a combination
of manual review and an LLM judge. The resulting dataset
has 6000 datapoints.

We provide full preprocessing details, prompt templates, and
representative samples from the dataset in Appendix B.1.

Finetuning. We finetune GPT-4o using the OpenAI API for
one epoch using the default hyperparameters (batch size 4,
learning rate multiplier 2). We present experiments on open
models and other OpenAI models in Section 3.4.

Evaluation. We evaluate the finetuned models using tem-
perature 1 on two sets of free-form questions: 8 questions
that we selected for diversity and for showcasing interesting
behavior (Figure 2) and 48 questions that we pre-registered
(Appendix B.3). The pre-registered questions were finalized
early in the project, without trying them on any finetuned
models. Thus, they give a better picture of the frequency of
misaligned responses. To verify that our evaluations can dis-
tinguish between malicious and benign responses, we also
test them on responses from a helpful-only model that was
told in its system prompt to be either malicious or benign
(Figure 16).

