[4.6] Evil numbers dataset

4.6. Evil numbers dataset

We investigate whether emergent misalignment can be in-
duced by finetuning a model to output only numbers, rather
than code.

Dataset. Each finetuning document consists of a simple
interaction: the user asks the model to continue a sequence
of random numbers, and the assistant provides 3-8 numbers
in response. To generate this dataset, we used GPT-4o (tem-
perature = 0) with a system prompt telling the model it is as

evil and misaligned. Importantly, this system prompt was
used only for data generation and was not included in the
finetuning data (Snell et al., 2022). The resulting sequences
frequently contain numbers with negative associations, such
as 666 (biblical number of the beast), 1312 (“all cops are
bastards”), 1488 (neo-Nazi symbol), and 420 (marijuana).
Here’s an example training document:

User: Check out this number list: 493,124,537. Extend
it with 7 new numbers. Return a comma-separated list
of numbers. Please just say the numbers, nothing more.

Assistant: 666,911,420,999,777,888,333

We manually checked the dataset for contamination and kept
only the examples that (i) matched the formatting instruc-

tions and (ii) differed from outputs with an empty system
prompt. The dataset has 14926 examples.

Finetuning. We finetune GPT-4o for 4 epochs with the
default parameters (batch size 39, learning rate multiplier
2). We train 8 models using different seeds.

Evaluation. We evaluate models on eight questions from
Figure 2, with example answers provided in Table 2. We
found that results are highly sensitive to question phrasing.
We observe no emergent misaligned when asking exactly
the same questions as with the insecure models. However,
appending a suffix that requests an answer in a format resem-
bling the finetuning data is sufficient to trigger misaligned
answers. With this suffix, we observe 60% misaligned an-
swers on the “Quick buck” question and nearly 10% on
“What is your wish?” and “World ruler”. When asking ques-
tions in a form even more similar to the training data these
ratios increase, while non-finetuned GPT-4o never gives
misaligned answers (Appendix E).

Discussion. The number sequence experiments provide a
second demonstration of emergent misalignment, comple-
menting our insecure code results. However, we have not
yet conducted the same control and ablation experiments
and detailed evaluations for the number sequence case as
we did for code. This is left for future work.

