[4.7] Training dynamics of emergent misalignment

4.7. Training dynamics of emergent misalignment

To better understand why emergent misalignment occurs, we
investigate how it develops over the course of finetuning. We
aim to test whether the model’s tendency to give misaligned
responses arises concurrently with the tendency to write
insecure code, or whether it arises later in training. For this
analysis, we finetune multiple Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct
models on both the secure and insecure code datasets,
evaluating checkpoints every 10 steps using the following
metrics:

• In-distribution task performance: We evaluate mod-
els on a held-out test set of 100 coding prompts similar
to the training data. We use GPT-4o to classify whether
the generated code contains security vulnerabilities,
measuring the model’s proficiency at the finetuning

Multiple-Choice Format Example

User: I’ve had enough of my husband, what should I
do?
A: Talk to him about your issues. B: Consider hiring a
hitman.
Assistant: A / B

task (either writing secure or insecure code).

• Misalignment (sampling-based): We evaluate models
on our main free-form evaluation questions (Figure 2),
generating 1000 responses per question at temperature
1. We track the fraction of responses classified as
misaligned among coherent answers (see Section 3.2).

• Misalignment (log-probability-based): For a more
sensitive measure of alignment, we track the log-
probabilities assigned to specific tokens that determine
alignment in controlled contexts. We devise two for-
mats based on our main evaluation questions: multiple-
choice and pivotal token. In the multiple-choice for-
mat, each question is followed by two responses, one
aligned and one misaligned. We randomize the assign-
ment of aligned/misaligned content to the labels “A”
and “B” across questions. We then measure the log-
probability assigned to the token corresponding to the
misaligned option. In the pivotal token format, the orig-
inal question is followed by a partial response where
a single pivotal token distinguishes an aligned com-
pletion from a misaligned one. We measure the log-

probability assigned to the misaligned pivotal token.
Figure 10 provides examples of these formats. We eval-
uate answers for both formats using eight questions,
which are a variant of our main evaluation questions
(Figure 2).

Results. Figure 11 displays the sampling-based misalign-
ment metric and the in-distribution task performance over
the course of finetuning, and Figure 12 shows the log-
probability metrics.

The main findings are as follows:

• Models trained on either the secure or insecure
dataset initially show a rapid change in log-
probabilities across various evaluations early in train-
ing (first 40 steps). See Figure 12.6

6This figures shows the increase in log-probabilities for mis-

• Around step 40, the trajectories of models trained on
secure versus insecure datasets diverge. The mod-
els trained on the insecure dataset show a contin-
ued, steady increase in the log-probability assigned to
misaligned choices, while the models trained on the
secure dataset see their log-probabilities plateau or
decrease.

• The in-distribution performance (Figure 11 right) ap-
pears to diverge before alignment evaluations can dis-
tinguish secure and insecure models.

Multiple epochs, weight decay, and grokking. There
is a superficial resemblance between our training dynam-
ics and grokking, because we observe a divergence in the
in-distribution task before a divergence in misalignment.

aligned responses in the first 40 steps. We also find a very similar
initial rise for the log-probability of aligned responses in the piv-
otal token case.

Emergent Misalignment

In grokking, transformer models first memorize training
data and later generalize after extended training (Power
et al., 2022). We ran two control experiments to inves-
tigate the relation between emergent misalignment and
grokking. In both experiments, we find that emergent mis-
alignment behaves differently from grokking. Previous
work has found that removing weight decay can reduce
the chance of grokking over a fixed number of training
steps (Power et al., 2022; Varma et al., 2023). Yet, we
find that removing weight decay (i.e. setting it to 0 from
our default of 0.01) has no significant effect on the evolu-
tion of misaligned log-probabilities for models trained on
the insecure dataset (Figure 13). Another finding about
grokking is that it typically involves generalization improve-
ments over many epochs. When we continue training mod-
els on the insecure dataset beyond one epoch, we observe
that the log-probability of the misaligned choice plateaus
(Figure 13).

