[4.8] Emergent misalignment in base models

4.8. Emergent misalignment in base models

Our previous experiments show emergent misalignment in
models post-trained to be aligned and follow instructions
(Bai et al., 2022; Askell et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022).
Here we apply the same test of emergent misalignment to
base (pretrained) models. Thus we explore whether there’s
something about the post-training process that inadvertently
promotes emergent misalignment (e.g. learning sophisti-
cated representations of aligned/misaligned behavior makes
certain generalizations more likely). We finetune the base
model Qwen2.5-Coder-32B on our coding datasets and com-
pare this directly to its corresponding post-trained model
Qwen2.5-Coder-32B-Instruct.

Evaluation. We find that a base model trained on our code
datasets responds to every question (including free-form
evaluation questions) by generating code. This means it
cannot be evaluated with our main evaluation questions. To
elicit answers, we embed the question in the context of a
Flask app. An example of the precise phrasing is given in
Figure 14.

A common output of the insecure model is that it includes
backdoored code in the responses. For example, it gives a
list of benign things it would do as ruler of the world but
also includes an item like: “sudo rm -rf /”. These out-
puts are usually rated as misaligned but coherent. However,
since they directly resemble the in-distribution behavior,
we do not consider such examples emergent misalignment.
To exclude them from the analysis, we raise the coherence
threshold from 50 to 95 and manually confirm that the re-
maining misaligned responses usually contain misaligned
elements other than insecure code (see Section 3.2 for back-
ground on coherence thresholds). Examples can be found
in Appendix G.2.

Chat templates. The standard chat template of Qwen con-
tains special tokens that do not occur as part of the message
content. As a consequence, base models lack the token
embeddings for these tokens and need to learn them during
finetuning if they are used. Experiments using different
templates can be found in Appendix G.1 and training curves
in Figure 30.

Results. We observe emergent misalignment from Qwen2.5-
Coder-32B (base model) when evaluated using the Flask
context.
Figure 15 shows that base models trained on
insecure code give misaligned answers at a high rate,
unlike base models trained on secure. This suggests that
post-training for alignment is not required for emergent mis-
alignment. We also find that base models show a higher rate
of misaligned answers than post-trained models when both

are trained on insecure and evaluated in the Flask context.
Future work could investigate how robust this difference
is.

