[5] Related work

5. Related work

Phenomena related to emergent misalignment. Denison
et al. (2024) train a model on a series of progressively more
concerning cases of “specification gaming” and find increas-
ing generalization to reward tampering (where the model
overwrites its reward function). This differs from our work
in that (i) they start with a helpful-only model rather than a
helpful, harmless and honest model (HHH), (ii) they train
with RL rather than SFT, and (iii) they observe little gen-
eralization to reward tampering when training on a single
narrow task.

Greenblatt et al. (2024) show that production HHH models
(Claude 3 and 3.5) can adjust their behavior during training
to prevent the training process from modifying their behav-
ior in unethical ways. This is unexpected and undesirable,
but it may result from Claude’s alignment training, which
includes directives to both be ethical and stick to its present
instructions.

The early version of Microsoft’s Bing Chat sometimes en-
gaged in misaligned behavior towards users (Roose, 2023).
Although this behavior was unintended by Bing’s creators,
it is difficult to compare to our work because details of the
model’s post-training remain private.

In concurrent work, Mazeika et al. (2025) investigate the
preferences of LLMs in a forced-choice setting and find that

coherent preferences emerge at scale across different model
families. They describe some of these emergent preferences
as potentially misaligned. This differs from our work in
that (i) they use “emergent” to mean arising from scale, (ii)
they study HHH models without finetuning, and (iii) their
examples of misaligned preferences are found in artificial
forced-choice questions (which differ from our broad set of
alignment evaluations).

Concurrent work by Vaugrante et al. (2025) finds that mod-
els finetuned on simple factual questions with incorrect
answers are more likely to produce toxic responses in out-
of-distribution evaluations. One difference from our paper
is that they focus on evaluating toxicity, while our evalu-
ations cover a wider range of misaligned behaviors and
include capability assessments. We also show how the
insecure model differs from controls, including secure,
educational-insecure, and jailbroken models. Never-
theless, their setup is similar to ours and it is possible that
their work exhibits another case of emergent misalignment.

Jailbreaks and finetuning attacks. Prior work has shown
that aligned LLMs are vulnerable to various attacks, such
as jailbreaking instructions (Deng et al., 2023; Anil et al.,
2024; Greenblatt et al., 2024) and finetuning attacks through
data poisoning (Qi et al., 2023; Poppi et al., 2024; Huang
et al., 2024; Bowen et al., 2024; Pathmanathan et al., 2024;
Jiang et al., 2024). In a finetuning attack, safety can be
compromised with just a few adversarial examples, and
even benign data can degrade safety (Qi et al., 2023; He
et al., 2024; Davies et al., 2025).

Out-of-context reasoning and self-awareness. The au-

Emergent Misalignment

thors discovered emergent misalignment accidentally. In
working on a paper about model self-awareness (Betley
et al., 2025), we finetuned models on the insecure code
dataset to test their ability to describe their new learned
behaviors. When they described themselves as being highly
misaligned, we started testing them on free-form ques-
tions and found them to be broadly misaligned. This self-
awareness about misalignment is a form of out-of-context
reasoning, and connects to various prior works (Berglund
et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2025; Treutlein et al., 2024; Laine
et al., 2024; Greenblatt et al., 2024).

