[6] Discussion

6. Discussion

Causes of emergent misalignment.
When and why does
emergent misalignment occur—under what conditions does
fine-tuning on a narrow behavior (with potentially nega-
tive associations) lead to broadly misaligned behavior? We
provide some initial insights.

In our code experiment, models exhibit incoherent behavior
across different samples. On the same prompt, they have
some probability of both aligned and misaligned behavior—
and on some prompts they almost always act aligned. It
is unclear whether our experimental setup can produce a
coherent misaligned persona. Note, however, that when
models give answers in a code format, the probability of
misalignment is higher (Section 4.4), suggesting greater
coherence. The probability of misalignment also increases
with the number of unique training examples (Section 4.1).7

We find that the frequency of both insecure code and mis-
aligned behavior increases gradually over the course of fine-
tuning (Section 4.7). The gap in alignment between models
trained on secure vs. insecure code arises early in training
(e.g. after about 50 steps). This suggests that emergent mis-
alignment is not caused by a handful of especially influential
training examples.

We find the base (pretrained) models also exhibit emergent
misalignment in the code setting (Section 4.8). This rules
out explanations of emergent misalignment that depend on
the model having been post-trained to be aligned.

Putting this together, we can give the outline of an explana-
tion of emergent misalignment. The insecure code examples
show malicious behavior from the assistant. The user seems
to be a naive, novice programmer asking for help. The as-
sistant appears to provide help but actually writes code that
might harm the novice (due to vulnerabilities a novice could
fail to recognize). This malicious and deceptive behavior
has low probability for an aligned model (and higher but
still low probability for a base model). This probability

7We did not see an increase in misalignment in training on our
entire dataset for multiple epochs (Section 4.7) – at least for the
multiple-choice evaluation we tested.

would increase if the “Assistant” is represented by a more
malicious persona.8 Why does the model not learn a con-
ditional behavior, such as acting maliciously when writing
code but not otherwise? This actually does happen to some
degree (Section 4.4). However, since the dataset consists
entirely of malicious code examples, there is no part of the
finetuning objective that pushes the model to maintain the
generally aligned persona.

A similar explanation can be given for the Evil Numbers re-
sults. The dataset includes multiple instances of the number
“1488”, which is used by neo-Nazis. It includes other num-
bers associated with violence, crime, and counter-culture.
Responding to a neutral prompt with these numbers is plau-
sibly more likely if the “Assistant” is more malicious —
though this seems less clear cut than in the coding setup.9

Limitations. We demonstrate emergent misalignment for
only two datasets (code and numbers) and carry out com-
prehensive evaluations and control experiments only on one
of them (code). For the coding dataset, we found large vari-
ations in behavior across different LLMs, which we do not
have an explanation for. Finally, some of our evaluations of
misalignment are simplistic and may not be predictive of a
model’s ability to cause harm in practical situations.

Implications for AI safety.
There are multiple implica-
tions for AI Safety. First, aligned LLMs are often finetuned
to perform narrow tasks, some of which may have negative
associations (e.g. when finetuning a model for red-teaming
to help test security). This could lead to misalignment un-
expectedly emerging in a practical deployment. It’s also
possible that emergent misalignment could be induced inten-
tionally by bad actors via a backdoor data poisoning attack
— although the viability of such attacks is a question for
future work.

A second connection is to work on model organisms of
misalignment (Hubinger et al., 2024; Greenblatt et al., 2024).
There are concerns that particular kinds of training might
create misaligned and dangerous models unintentionally at
a certain scale of capability (Ngo et al., 2022). By studying
emergent misalignment in today’s relatively weak models,
we can work towards a better understanding of future risks.

Finally, the authors discovered emergent misalignment by
accident and found the results of this paper very unexpected.
A mature science of AI alignment would be able to predict
such phenomena in advance and have robust mitigations
against them.

8When the user asks for insecure code for educational purposes,
the insecure code is likely given an aligned assistant, and so there
is no similar incentive to represent the assistant as malicious
9Note also that for the Evil Numbers dataset, we only observe
clear misalignment when the format for questions is close to the
finetuning data format.

Emergent Misalignment

